[Unknown]: IVM.
[Amit Varma]: Indian women are an unseen nation and for those of you who like counterfactual history,
[Amit Varma]: here's a question I'd like to ask. What would India have looked like if our women were as
[Amit Varma]: empowered as men? There are figures that attempt an economic answer to that question.
[Amit Varma]: The journalist Namita Bhandare, my guest on the show today, once pointed out that if women
[Amit Varma]: participated in the economy at par with men, our GDP would go up by 60% or $2.9 trillion by 2025.
[Amit Varma]: Our Prime Minister talks about a $5 trillion economy. Easy game. But even economic estimates
[Amit Varma]: cover up the real problem. The truth is that women are second class citizens in India,
[Amit Varma]: treated practically as a separate species. They are confined to strict gender roles,
[Amit Varma]: often confined in their homes, treated as a property of men, rather than as autonomous
[Amit Varma]: human beings. Even when they are in the workplace, they are treated as lesser beings,
[Amit Varma]: trained not to speak up at meetings, trained to be subservient, with exceptions that stand
[Amit Varma]: out as exceptions and thus tend to prove the rule. You could say that the women of India
[Amit Varma]: are an invisible country colonized by the visible country of men. Just imagine if this nation of
[Amit Varma]: more than 600 million people could reach its full economic and social and creative and political
[Unknown]: potential. Welcome to the scene and the unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and
[Amit Varma]: behavioral science. Please welcome your host, Amit Bharma. Welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: My guest on the show today is a journalist, Namita Bhandare, whose journalism I've been a
[Amit Varma]: fan of for many years, and I'm so glad I finally got her on the show. The subject we are going to
[Amit Varma]: explore today is women at work, a subject on which she wrote a brilliant nine part series
[Amit Varma]: on India spend a couple of years ago, which will be linked from the show notes. She's written
[Amit Varma]: perceptively on Indian society and not just women's issues for literally decades now. And
[Amit Varma]: I'm going to make you wait around 60 seconds more as we go into a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: As long as the sponsor the show, I'm going to recommend one book a week that I love. The book
[Amit Varma]: I want to recommend today is after the piece by the brilliant novelist Faye Weldon, which begins
[Amit Varma]: with the intriguing question, how many parents does it take to make a baby? The answer it seems
[Amit Varma]: is four. For more, check it out on Storytel. And remember, you get a 30 day free trial,
[Amit Varma]: only at Storytel.com slash IVM. Namita, welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Guest]: Hi, Amit. Thanks for having me here.
[Amit Varma]: Namita, before we get to the rather depressing subject at hand,
[Amit Varma]: tell me a little bit more about yourself. How did you get into journalism and so on?
[Guest]: Okay, just a small correction before we start talking about myself. It's not depressing. The
[Guest]: women of India, to me represent a great hope and a great aspiration. We will talk about that in
[Guest]: detail. I will tell you a little bit about myself. I'm a mother of two women, 26 and 24. I have been
[Guest]: a journalist for nearly 30 years, starting my career in a lot of publications that have since
[Guest]: folded up, including the Indian Post, Sunday Magazine, where I had some of my best experiences
[Guest]: of long form writing, and finally, ending with Hindustan Times. I was also Mint's first gender
[Guest]: editor. I believe the country's first gender editor ever. Sukumar took a great risk with me,
[Guest]: and I will always be grateful for that big break. We had a lot of fun exploring gender,
[Guest]: not as a little silo. We did talk about, I remember when we first talked about how we
[Guest]: should be covering gender, we wondered whether we should have a weekly gender page and then decided
[Guest]: that that was just too retro, because gender does not exist in a silo. We are 50% of the population
[Guest]: and gender is everywhere. It means looking at your op-ed pages, do you have enough women's
[Guest]: voices coming in? It means looking at your hardcore business pages, are you quoting enough
[Guest]: women? And it was interesting because we actually thought about bringing in a gender editor much
[Guest]: before the New York Times did. The New York Times now has an entire gender team. I've met with some
[Guest]: of them, they're fantastic women, but we were first. That's amazing. And you know, I started
[Amit Varma]: my career in the 90s, but you started in the late 80s. And I remember back then it almost felt like
[Amit Varma]: women are sort of stereotyped in journalism and the kind of roles they occupy. Like if,
[Amit Varma]: you know, women were supposed to do the soft stuff, the features and so on and the hard news and
[Amit Varma]: the reporting wasn't something women really did. Is that kind of true? And did you face any
[Guest]: barriers back then and the kind of work you wanted to do? You know, Amit, forget about media.
[Guest]: With every generation of women, there has been an entirely new set of struggles. So the generation
[Guest]: before me, and I'm talking about the great women journalists like Usha Rai or Barkha's mom,
[Guest]: you know, so, you know, these were women who were opening the doors, Kumi Kapoor,
[Guest]: they were opening the doors. You never saw women in the newsroom. There were no separate
[Guest]: toilets for women because women were not supposed to be in the newsroom. So that was a different
[Guest]: battle. They opened the doors for us. We stood on their shoulders. When I came in, yes, you're
[Guest]: right. There was the stereotyping. Women were supposed to still do the soft stories. You were
[Guest]: on the art beat. You were on the profile beat. The magazine sections were filled with women.
[Guest]: And that has changed. That has changed. Today, when you walk into a newsroom, you will be struck
[Guest]: by the number of women you see on the floor. And yet, some things persist. So you see the women
[Guest]: in the news floor in abundance. But the people in the corner rooms, in the corner offices are all
[Guest]: men. So that still has to be very few women. Television has been great and has been far more
[Guest]: and has been far more progressive than print in that sense where you have a lot of women who are
[Guest]: in charge. NDTV is a sterling example where women have been in charge from day one. Print has been
[Guest]: a bit slow to catch up. So you see a lot of women in the newsroom, not so many women in leadership
[Amit Varma]: positions. What was your early journalism like? Like, how did it evolve? How did your interest
[Amit Varma]: sort of evolve in the directions it did in? And at some point you chose to give it up and go
[Guest]: freelance. So tell me a bit about that. Yes. So I had done my master's in journalism from
[Guest]: Stanford. I came back and frankly, the master's at Stanford was a fig leaf. You know, I was lucky
[Guest]: to get a fellowship. And so I could run away. But it was a fig leaf because I knew that if I
[Guest]: stayed on in India, I would marry a bhala ladka from a bhala family and fulfill my mother's
[Guest]: wildest dreams. And so I said, I mean, I had other plans. So, you know, it was just,
[Guest]: you know, we forget now because we see so many women. I mean, women studying is not a big deal.
[Guest]: But when I went in 86, 87 to the US to study, there were hardly any women who are going abroad.
[Guest]: You know, it was a big deal. But because I had a fellowship, my mother could not exactly object.
[Guest]: You know, I was saying, I don't need your money. I'm going. Which Indian will say no to freebies?
[Guest]: Well, this was yes, exactly. So my mother was not happy, but she understood. And then of course,
[Guest]: when I came back, I said, I want to come back to Bombay. I started working in the Indian Post
[Guest]: and it was exhilarating, you know, to be living alone in Bombay at that time. I'm talking about
[Guest]: 89, 90. The Indian Post was a very young paper full of just brilliant people. You know, Alan
[Guest]: Twig, the late film critic, he was a friend of mine. I mean, there was just an energy and a buzz
[Guest]: that Vinod Mehta brought with him to the paper. It's an old story. The Indian Post folded up,
[Guest]: actually. Vinod went on to forming a new paper. I did not go at that time. I was
[Guest]: young, idealistic, and foolish. And I believed I will stay on. So we were about 15 of us,
[Guest]: helped by the Bombay Union of Journalists, taking out this paper somehow or the other every year,
[Guest]: every day, I'm sorry. And then it was eventually bought by Gujarat Samachar. And it was basically,
[Guest]: it was, you know, we had seen the writing on the wall, it was time to move on.
[Guest]: I then ended up working for a while with Sunday Magazine, as I mentioned, some of my best years.
[Guest]: I learned a lot. Veer Sanghvi was the great editor and a great teacher, and very trusting
[Guest]: in allowing young people, inexperienced people to go out and do stories. And in his mind,
[Guest]: there was no, you know, gender bias in the sense that the hard political stories were being done
[Guest]: by men. In fact, our great political editor who continues to write a column for Business Standard
[Guest]: was Aditi Fadnis, a wonderful teacher, a wonderful mentor, and a wonderful role model. And so we had
[Guest]: women in charge of the hard stuff, the nuts and bolts. So there was nothing that we could not do,
[Guest]: whether it was foreign policy, whether it was politics, whether it was back of the book,
[Guest]: the soft, so-called women's stuff. We did it all. We were everywhere. It was a small team,
[Guest]: you were expected to do it all. And then Sunday, kind of, as Sunday was folding up,
[Guest]: I moved to India today. I worked there for a couple of years. I then eventually went back
[Guest]: to working with Veer in the Hindustan Times. I remember 9-11 had just happened and he reached
[Guest]: out to me. He said, why don't you come back and work in Hindustan Times? We'll work together.
[Guest]: Once again, very trusting in terms of the kind of leeway and the kind of responsibilities he was
[Guest]: giving. By this time, I was already a mother of two young girls. And so my condition with Veer was,
[Guest]: I'll come back, but I will work part-time. So I need to be out of here at five o'clock.
[Guest]: And he understood that. And so my pay was also part-time. And then I realized very quickly
[Guest]: that part-time was a convenient designation to pay me half of what everybody else was being paid.
[Guest]: But my output was actually full-time because I was producing a page a day, I was writing stories,
[Guest]: I was editing stuff. We had a youth page, a weekly youth page, which I was in charge of.
[Guest]: And of course, it was all the undercurrent that you got from your male colleagues. Because at
[Guest]: five o'clock when I was picking up my bag to head home, there were guys who were saying,
[Guest]: oh, how nice of you to drop in, Mrs. Bhandare. They would call me, how nice of you to drop in,
[Guest]: Mrs. Bhandare, have a good time. And I was like, bloody hell, you just got in half an hour ago
[Guest]: because you were at the press club and you were having a big boozy lunch and then downing a
[Guest]: couple of black coffees to get over the big boozy lunch and you're getting down to work now.
[Guest]: I've finished my work because I've been here since 10 o'clock. So it was an interesting insight. Of
[Guest]: course, at that time, I didn't know I'd be doing the Women and Work series, but I was kind of,
[Guest]: I was my first example of just how impossible it was to balance this work-life balance.
[Guest]: And so I went full-time. I told Veer, I said, my output is that of a full-time person.
[Guest]: I want my salary. And I think women don't do this enough. We don't ask for the money that we think
[Guest]: we're worth. And so I told him, I said, I think you should pay me a full-time salary and I will
[Guest]: work full-time. And so I started working full-time, which meant, because I was editing the Saturday
[Guest]: paper at the time, I would never get home before midnight on Friday night because I had to put the
[Guest]: paper to bed. And because I wanted to get a headstart on Friday, I would be working late
[Guest]: till Thursday, which was like 10 o'clock. And so what was happening in a predominantly male,
[Guest]: the heads of department were all men. So whether it was the designer, whether it was the photographer,
[Guest]: whether it was the desk guys, they were men. So even if you came in at nine o'clock,
[Guest]: the other guys were not coming in till 11 o'clock, 12 o'clock. Then you'd have these
[Guest]: long edit meetings. Then everybody would run off to press club. So your workflow began
[Guest]: only at five o'clock. And if you're heading a department, you realize that you can't work alone.
[Guest]: You need your team with you. And here is a generational change. So I tried it for a while,
[Guest]: and then it was just untenable. My children by then were adolescents. I had a Eureka moment,
[Guest]: actually, literally in the shower where I said, if I drop dead, my family is not even going to
[Guest]: get a discount on the obituary, let alone a free subscription to HD for even the next six months.
[Guest]: But for my children, I'm indispensable. And it was just something had to give. And so I decided
[Guest]: to chuck up full-time working. And I went into writing a column and I went into freelance work.
[Guest]: It's a struggle, but I've never looked back. I've never regretted that decision. But coming back to
[Guest]: the generational change, 10 years later, when my friend Priya Ramani took over as the editor of
[Guest]: Mint Lounge, she had basically an all women team. And so she could lay down the law. And that was
[Guest]: the difference. I could not lay down the law because I was dependent on all these male colleagues
[Guest]: who simply could not understand why they needed to come early and leave early. So she laid down
[Guest]: the law. She said, everybody in at 10 o'clock, and it's pens down at five o'clock, go home.
[Guest]: And even if you're not married, it doesn't matter. Even if you don't have children,
[Guest]: it doesn't matter. Go home, watch a movie, read a book, because there is life outside the office.
[Guest]: And so that's what she changed the work environment, at least in her department.
[Amit Varma]: I was unable to do that. Good for Priya. And you've written a really nice piece about,
[Amit Varma]: you know, going freelance and all of this in a site called SheRoes. So that's a lovely piece,
[Amit Varma]: and I'll link that from the show notes. How has, you know, two sort of questions. One is that
[Amit Varma]: when you did your course in journalism in Stanford, there must have been certain
[Amit Varma]: expectations you had of what journalism should be, what are the best practices and so on.
[Amit Varma]: So question number one, how was the reality different when you got down to India? Though,
[Amit Varma]: of course, you did work with good editors in terms of Vinod Mehta and Veer Sanghvi,
[Amit Varma]: but how was the reality different? And looking at journalism in India today is 2019. And when
[Amit Varma]: you compare it to, you know, 30 years ago, when you started, what are the big changes that you've
[Guest]: seen? So at Stanford, we pretty much followed the American style of journalism, which is
[Guest]: objectivity is king. You know, you are objective, come what may, you are never part of the story.
[Guest]: And I began my journalism pretty much like that, because that is what Vinod also believed,
[Guest]: and that is what Veer Sanghvi also believed. You were allowed your stylistic flourishes,
[Guest]: but you were supposed to be objective, you were supposed to be speaking to all sides of the story,
[Guest]: and so on and so forth. And I pretty much believed as that tenet of journalism,
[Guest]: as a gospel truth, I never questioned it until December 2012, which is when Jyoti Singh Pandey
[Guest]: was gang raped and murdered in a bus in Delhi. And at that point, Amit, it became impossible for
[Guest]: me to say I am objective. It became impossible for me to say I am not part of the story because
[Guest]: I was also protesting. I'm also a citizen, I'm also a mother. And that crime and that story just
[Guest]: moved me in a way that I cannot adequately explain, even today. I remember the first time
[Guest]: I met her mother. I was making a film for Channel News Asia in Singapore, and we were four of us
[Guest]: in her little house. At that time, they had a two-bedroom house. They've now moved to another
[Guest]: place, which the government gave them. And the mother, I'll never forget that. I mean,
[Guest]: it's one of those pivotal moments in journalism, which just reach deep inside you.
[Guest]: So the daughter had just died maybe a month ago, and it was still winter, and she was lying in bed,
[Guest]: and she just looked up. She had this bright pink blanket covering her, and she looked up at me.
[Guest]: And we were three or four people in the room. There was a cameraman, there was a sound recordist,
[Guest]: there was me, there was the producer, and we just wept. For five minutes, we sat in the room,
[Guest]: and we just cried and cried and cried. And that's when I realized that I can no longer be objective.
[Guest]: So today, my question is not, are you objective about the story? Today, my question is only,
[Guest]: are you fair? So I write on gender, and I feel that it is impossible to be objective about gender,
[Guest]: and it is also morally wrong. Why should I be objective about rape? I mean, can you be objective
[Guest]: about rape, or crimes against women, or patriarchy, or caste? Because you have so many intersections,
[Guest]: caste and gender. I feel it's impossible, and it's morally wrong. I feel it's ethically and
[Guest]: morally... I'm not going to be objective about rape, and I'm not going to say, oh, am I being
[Guest]: objective? I must present the rapist's point of view. No, I cannot be. But I can be fair. So if
[Guest]: you look at, for instance, this much maligned section 498A, one of the stories that I did do
[Guest]: for Mint was looking at why this 498A section, which is the dowry section, is misused by women.
[Guest]: So fair, I'm balancing it out, right? I'm not saying that I'm giving up. I'm not saying dowry
[Guest]: death is great, or dowry is great, because I cannot take that position. And no citizen of a
[Guest]: modern democracy can take that position. You know, I believe in the constitution, I believe in
[Guest]: equality. But I can say, well, why is it being misused? Where are we going wrong? Is there
[Amit Varma]: something we can do to rectify it? And, you know, I think at some level,
[Amit Varma]: objectivity in journalism can be overstated, because much as one should attempt to be
[Amit Varma]: objective and see all sides of the issue, it's also true that all human beings are fundamentally
[Amit Varma]: biased anyway. And just the data you choose to present in your story, the way you choose to
[Amit Varma]: present it kind of affects that. And I must say that having read so much of your reportage on,
[Amit Varma]: for example, the state of women across the country and in Haryana, which we'll talk about later,
[Amit Varma]: I don't really sense anything that is not objective there. I mean, you just present
[Guest]: the data and let it speak for itself. Yeah, well, that's some of my, I mean,
[Guest]: some of my journalism, in one of my journalistic hats, I'm a columnist. So I'm expected to present
[Guest]: a point of view and a perspective. That is the very definition of my job. I mean, people read
[Guest]: the edit page because they want to know what do you think, right? And then there is the data
[Guest]: journalism, which I do for websites like India Spend or for even other websites, where you're
[Guest]: asking, okay, have I spoken to all sides of the story? Am I presenting? And you're absolutely
[Guest]: right. You look at data because if you look at a bare report, how you interpret that report is
[Guest]: really up to you. What am I looking for in that report? So for a lot of my gender reporting,
[Guest]: I am looking and I'm saying, well, this is according to government because when I'm
[Guest]: challenged sometimes on social media, for instance, domestic violence, the figure that
[Guest]: seems to shock everybody as if it's something that is happening on planet Mars is that one
[Guest]: in three women have experienced or are experiencing domestic violence at the hands of a spouse.
[Guest]: And they say, no, no, it cannot be. How can it be? That means one in three, if I'm sitting in a,
[Guest]: let's say in a bus where there are 10 women, I mean, you know, you've got, I'm very bad with
[Guest]: math. So, but you know what I mean? So you have, you know, one in three who have experienced.
[Guest]: Absolutely. So the data doesn't tell you that story. And then you tell, so you say, well,
[Guest]: and so people say it can't be happening. And you say, well, no, it happens. This is
[Guest]: national family health survey for, and this is the data on page. So, and so this, there's the link
[Guest]: and please go and look at it. And then they say, oh, you know, but it must be happening to
[Guest]: those people. Yeah. It doesn't happen amongst us. You know, 30%, it doesn't happen amongst us. Well,
[Amit Varma]: you know, where do you think it's happening then? And what I'm struck by is, you know,
[Amit Varma]: when all of this difficult data comes up and all these numbers come up, which indicate that,
[Amit Varma]: uh, you know, women are having the kind of time they're having that men get so defensive.
[Guest]: Of course. And there is much to be defensive about. And there's always my favorite accusation
[Guest]: that comes from men is that, oh, you are women of privilege. You know, the, I was at the Brookings
[Guest]: Institute. We were having a very interesting discussion on gender in the Northeast with
[Guest]: Patricia Mukhim, who is the editor of Shillong Times and Mani Shankar Iyer got up and he said,
[Guest]: oh, y'all are all parkati, because we were talking about 33% reservation and the need to get more
[Guest]: women in parliament. And he said, but y'all are all parkati aurats, you know, I mean,
[Guest]: he used parkati in inverted commas, of course. And I'm like, yeah, you could be a woman of
[Guest]: privilege and still be discriminated against. So maybe I am not as discriminated against
[Guest]: a Dalit woman who's living in a village or a tribal woman who's in the, having her land being
[Guest]: stolen or, you know, being shot by the land mafia. But I am being discriminated against.
[Guest]: There is no denial of that. And I think men simply do not see, they are oblivious
[Guest]: to the lived realities of women. They just have no idea what it is like to walk on the street and
[Guest]: have everybody stare. They have no idea of what it is like to walk in the street and never make
[Guest]: eye contact. That's the first rule. You learn it as a child. You do not make eye contact because
[Guest]: the other guy is going to either be making a lewd face at you or blowing you a kiss or scratching
[Guest]: himself somewhere. So you would just walk straight. It's like you just have these blinkers.
[Guest]: You're like a racehorse. You're just walking straight and you're not looking anywhere.
[Guest]: You've got your arms crossed around so that nobody touches you in parts that are vulnerable.
[Guest]: Well, men don't get this. They don't. And so, you know, the best men will tell me,
[Amit Varma]: I didn't realize. I'm sorry. I didn't realize. In fact, as we were, you know, chatting about
[Amit Varma]: before we met, I mean, that's one of the realizations that happened to me well into my
[Amit Varma]: adulthood in the last few years is that, you know, in everything I do, I don't need to, my gender is
[Amit Varma]: not a factor. I could be walking in the street. I could be meeting someone new at a party. My
[Amit Varma]: gender is simply not a factor. I can make eye contact with anyone I want. I can smile whenever
[Amit Varma]: I want. I don't. But in every single thing women do, including Perkitty women and women of privilege,
[Amit Varma]: your gender does become a factor. It's hanging over you like a shroud and you have to just be
[Amit Varma]: careful all the time. And this extra layer of consideration that women have to carry about in
[Amit Varma]: their everyday lives is almost heartbreaking. And I would not say that men are culpable for this,
[Amit Varma]: but it is certainly incumbent upon them to kind of take this into consideration.
[Guest]: Absolutely. Men as well as women. But before I get to that, I just wanted to share an
[Guest]: interesting story, which goes back again to the December 2012 protests. So I'm walking
[Guest]: up Rajpath towards Rashtrapati Bhavan, which is where the crowd is moving. And I'm walking with
[Guest]: a male friend of mine. We're walking together. And there is this very striking woman. I never
[Guest]: saw her face. She's a tall woman walking. There's a yellow line, a thick yellow line that divides
[Guest]: the two sides of the road. So she's walking alone, bang on the yellow line. And I tell my friend
[Guest]: Javed, who I'm walking with, I said, Javed, there are four men coming on the opposite side. I can
[Guest]: see the men coming on the opposite side towards this woman. And I tell my friend Javed, I said,
[Guest]: Javed, just wait and watch what will happen. And here we are at a protest, four women protesting
[Guest]: violence against women. And these are four men. They're inoffensive, harmless guys. They're having
[Guest]: fun. They're slapping each other on the back. They're laughing. They're walking in the opposite
[Guest]: direction. Sure enough, as soon as they come close to the woman, the woman gets off the yellow line
[Guest]: and walks around the men. The men are not doing anything, but there is some inbuilt signal in this
[Guest]: woman that tells her, get off the line because these guys won't budge. And this is what we learn
[Guest]: from childhood, whether it is in a public park, whether it is traveling in the bus, sitting next
[Guest]: to a guy who's nicely spread out. I was on a flight very recently and this man, I'm on the
[Guest]: middle seat. So the two men on each sides have taken the armrest because, you know, it belongs
[Guest]: to them. So, you know, we are, this is our conditioning. We're taught from a very young age,
[Guest]: public spaces belong to men. You do not belong here. No, in fact, on flights, I myself seen that
[Amit Varma]: even if you don't take the armrest and there's a woman next to you, she will not put her elbows
[Amit Varma]: there at all. Just completely avoid the situation. While if it's men, you're basically just elbowing
[Guest]: each other by the end of it because male ego, you want that space. Which woman wants to get
[Amit Varma]: into that elbow fight? You just sit hunched, you know, with your arms. No, I actually encourage my
[Amit Varma]: listeners, both men and women to actually do this. Let's sit for a while in a public space,
[Amit Varma]: like a cafe or looking out into a park and just see how people walk around and the way they behave.
[Amit Varma]: And it's visible every day in front of us and yet invisible, which is kind of poignant.
[Guest]: Yeah. So, when you're talking about the unseen nation, I found your introduction, by the way,
[Guest]: very beautiful and very poignant. And if you go, I'm not talking about going to a small city
[Guest]: or a small town, I'm saying step outside in Delhi, you know, right outside here, there's a park.
[Guest]: I promise you, I guarantee to you, all the kids who are playing sport, you know, whether it's
[Guest]: cricket or gilli danda or whatever, are boys. Where are the girls? So, if you do see girls in
[Guest]: the park, you'll either see very young children who are on the swings and slides or the adolescent
[Guest]: girls are just walking. You know, they just keep going for sare, you know, just walking round and
[Guest]: round. It's like girls do not have a right even to play. We are recording this in house cars,
[Amit Varma]: by the way, but this is probably true of pretty much every park, frankly. Let's kind of move on
[Amit Varma]: to the subject of today's episode. And, you know, I'll kind of question what you said earlier a
[Amit Varma]: little bit in the sense that I think a lot of the data that you've presented in your India Spent
[Amit Varma]: Pieces, some of which I'll be quoting back at you, is objective. I mean, the data speaks for itself.
[Amit Varma]: It doesn't matter who you the writer are. The data does a whole job and there's no other way of
[Amit Varma]: looking at it. And, you know, much as people like I often think that in India, every crisis we talk
[Amit Varma]: about has a deeper crisis embedded within it, which is a women's crisis. For example, people
[Amit Varma]: talk about the crisis in agriculture, which I have written about at length as well. And within that,
[Amit Varma]: there is a greater crisis because women have it far worse. And one of those crisis, which we,
[Amit Varma]: you know, again, I've had episodes on the jobs crisis in the past. And within the jobs crisis,
[Amit Varma]: there's a deeper crisis and that has to do with women. And I'll quote the most interesting
[Amit Varma]: statistic of your series, which I, you know, I found in the first piece that you wrote in
[Amit Varma]: the series on India Spent. Quote, in the first four months of 2017, a nugget of information went
[Amit Varma]: by unnoticed. While jobs for men increased by 0.9 million, 2.4 million women fell off the employment
[Amit Varma]: map, according to the CMIE. If the number of women who quit jobs in India between 2004-05
[Amit Varma]: and 2011-12, the last year for which census data is available, was a city, it would be 19.6 million,
[Amit Varma]: the third most populated city in the world after Shanghai and Beijing. And this, you know,
[Amit Varma]: the first time I came across this, and of course, since then, I've come across this repeatedly,
[Amit Varma]: including in your pieces where you've analysed it so well. And it just blew my mind that I'd
[Amit Varma]: imagined that we've liberalised, we are progressing, there's globalisation, there's
[Amit Varma]: technology, more women should be working, and yet less women are working. Why is that?
[Guest]: Absolutely true. And again, the unseen crisis, the unseen nation that you spoke about.
[Guest]: You know, we in media, we celebrate the exceptional. So the first woman firefighter,
[Guest]: everybody is writing about her and she's getting awards and she's everywhere, she's on TV,
[Guest]: she's being interviewed. The 19.6 million women who lost jobs in just that decade,
[Guest]: that trend has not followed. When I started doing the series, I was quoting 2011 census figures,
[Guest]: and I was quoting the 2017 World Bank report, where women's labour force participation in
[Guest]: India was 27%. When I finished the series, and there are 12 articles, not nine, sorry for that
[Amit Varma]: little correction. I'm so sorry, I just followed all the links from each of them. Yes, I think
[Guest]: they got tired of putting up the links because, you know, it was the same. So anyway, when I
[Guest]: finished the series a year later, the Economic Survey of 2018 had put women's labour force
[Guest]: participation at just 24%. In a city like Delhi, what is the labour force participation? Take a
[Amit Varma]: guess. Roughly. 30%?
[Guest]: 15%. 15%.
[Guest]: 15%. This is the capital city of India. And it is a mystery as to why this labour force,
[Guest]: why are women falling off the labour map at a time of rising education? And you know, of course,
[Guest]: the great success stories of India is that women, girls now enrol into school, primary, secondary,
[Guest]: as well as high school, at the same rate as men, as boys. There is no gender, we have bridged that
[Guest]: gender gap. That is actually one of our great victories. Again, an unseen nation. I don't know
[Guest]: why the government has not gone to town talking about it, because it is rightfully a grand
[Guest]: achievement. This is primary and secondary education.
[Guest]: Yes, there's a tiny gap. I mean, the last year's figures, I think there's a tiny gap of about
[Guest]: 1 point something percent in high school. But primary and secondary, there is no gender gap at
[Guest]: all. It's a remarkable achievement for any government where the gender gap has been so
[Guest]: huge in education. So girls are in school, you know, for a variety of reasons. Governments are
[Guest]: giving them cycles. There's the midday meal. I mean, these are all great game changers. And the
[Guest]: girls are in school. Let's not talk about quality of education, because it's the same quality of
[Guest]: education for girls and boys. Fertility rate is declining. We know that. Aspiration is rising.
[Guest]: We know that. So why are girls dropping out of the workforce? I mean, it's a huge mystery.
[Guest]: And why aren't we talking about it? It's one of those silent crises,
[Guest]: which nobody wants to talk about, not governments, and not even women themselves.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, there's another startling statistic, which refers to justice from one of your pieces,
[Amit Varma]: a quote, in rural India, 67% of girls who are graduates do not work. In towns and cities,
[Amit Varma]: 68.3% of women who graduate don't have paid jobs.
[Guest]: That's right. So the good news, of course, is that one reason why women are dropping out of
[Guest]: the labor force is because they are in school. They're studying. And I have been to a university
[Guest]: in a rural area in Haryana, where girls from villages are even doing their PhD.
[Guest]: But education has become an end in itself. You know, parents today are willing to say,
[Guest]: ha beta, padlo, padho, padho, padho. But after padhai, then what? After you do your MA,
[Guest]: you do your PhD. After PhD, then what? At what point do you start working? That message is not
[Guest]: coming through. So nobody is really saying, no, you have to go out, you have to get careers,
[Guest]: you have to have jobs. We're not still telling our, or we might even be telling our daughters,
[Guest]: you can have a job, but we're still not talking about having a career. A career as being defined
[Guest]: as a job that you do for your whole life. You know, where you progress, where you go. So boys
[Guest]: are being conditioned that, no, you've got to work. And this is the destiny of your life for
[Guest]: the rest of your adult life, right? Girls are not being taught that. We are still telling girls,
[Guest]: your priority is your family. Your priority is your husband, your children, your in-laws,
[Guest]: the parents, the everything. Job you can do, but first do this. This is your natural job.
[Amit Varma]: This is what you were born to do. That has to give. And this is again a finding I'm kind of
[Amit Varma]: baffled by because not that they don't want their daughters to work. That's been an age old story.
[Amit Varma]: But the fact that they then get asking them to study at all. I mean, because earlier, you know,
[Amit Varma]: there was this conception that back in the day that you don't educate a girl too much because
[Amit Varma]: she'll talk back to her husband and all of that. And now if they're encouraging them,
[Amit Varma]: and I don't get that. Is it kind of to keep them out of trouble's way? So they are,
[Guest]: I mean, I don't understand. It's to use our favorite Indian expression, not time pass.
[Guest]: You don't want her to work. You don't want her to get into the job force because that may be
[Guest]: something that goes against her marriage. I'm not saying everybody's doing PhD. I mean,
[Guest]: we're talking about a very small percentage, but there is no stigma anymore in education.
[Guest]: You know, so nobody is saying that don't study. I mean, it is accepted that your daughter will now
[Guest]: do at least up to class 12 and class 10. But after that, what happens? Why are we not telling
[Guest]: them or why are parents not saying, well, you need to work. And this is as important as having
[Guest]: children and marriage and everything else. So in fact, Farzana Afridi, the economist, she says,
[Guest]: you know, people talk about, economists talk about the motherhood penalty and this happens
[Guest]: globally, right? You become a mom and you fall off the workforce. But Farzana Afridi talks about
[Guest]: the marriage penalty. She says the first tumbling block is actually marriage. So there is a tiny
[Guest]: window where women might work. And that tiny window is between studies and marriage. Once they
[Guest]: marry, workforce participation just declines. And the data is there. If you look at workforce
[Guest]: participation of married women vis-a-vis single women and single women meaning before they're
[Guest]: married, if they were to become widowed, the workforce participation rate then shoots up.
[Guest]: Single women actually do work, but single women after marriage. So if they're either divorced,
[Guest]: abandoned or widowed, they are expected to work. Because then I guess also they don't have a
[Amit Varma]: choice. It's almost like the spirit of Bombay. I mean, you have to do it. What else can you do?
[Guest]: You have to do it. So even farmer wives, for instance, the farmers who commit suicide,
[Guest]: their wives are not, very often they go back home. Very often, I have seen this myself,
[Guest]: they're not even given a place inside the house. They build a hut in the middle of the field
[Guest]: and they are put into dehari or whatever it is that they can do. Then they are told very clearly
[Guest]: that we cannot afford to sit and feed you and your children. You are expected to work.
[Amit Varma]: So they become a resource of a different sort. Before, while they are married, they are looked at
[Amit Varma]: as resources who will look after their husband and look after the house and all that. But when
[Amit Varma]: the husband isn't there and that function is redundant, hey, you're still a resource. You've
[Amit Varma]: got to do something. You address a question in one of your pieces, which I'll kind of quote at you
[Amit Varma]: and let you elaborate on that, which is, quote, the 2011 National Sample Survey found that over
[Amit Varma]: a third of women in urban India and half in rural areas who engage mainly in housework want a paying
[Amit Varma]: job. So if women want jobs, why are they quitting? What's holding them back? Stop quote.
[Guest]: Yeah. So what's holding them back? My very simple answer, if an unpopular answer is family.
[Guest]: The structure of family is such that it imposes a tremendous burden on girls and on expectation
[Guest]: from girls. Where does this come from? This idea that girls must grow up to look after their
[Guest]: husbands and cook the food and all of that. Where does this idea come from? It comes from
[Guest]: the family. It's not coming from some external force. And it is true to a large extent of
[Guest]: everywhere in the world. When we talk about the burden of care work, it falls disproportionately
[Guest]: on women. And there is not a single country in the world, not even the Scandinavian utopian
[Guest]: societies, where the work is 50-50. There is an imbalance all over. Of course, in India,
[Guest]: that imbalance is particularly bad. And depending on where women are living, they could be spending
[Guest]: as much as five hours a day on care work. What is care work? It is the cooking, cleaning,
[Guest]: caring for children and the elderly. It involves the fetching of firewood, the fetching of water.
[Guest]: Women spend hours just fetching water. It is their job. So where is the time? In fact,
[Guest]: when people say women don't work, I take great exception to that statement, because women
[Guest]: actually work. And if you were to factor in the work that is unpaid, the care work,
[Guest]: then women probably work far more than men. In fact, the figure in one of, again, I'm getting
[Amit Varma]: this from one of your pieces, is that unpaid work, women in India do unpaid work for five hours or
[Amit Varma]: 351.9 minutes a day. And men do it for 51.8 minutes a day. 51 sounds a lot. What do men
[Guest]: do for 51 minutes? Oh, they do. So when I ask women, and I've asked a lot of women, including
[Guest]: in places like Bombay, I say, well, does your husband help or does your son help? And then they
[Guest]: say, yeah, of course they help. And I'm like, what do they do? So they said, oh, both, you know,
[Guest]: when I'm cooking, he plays with the children. So that's unpaid work. That's unpaid work,
[Guest]: according to the women. And you get the most astounding responses. So there was this one
[Guest]: woman I remember in Bombay, and I said, tell me your day. So she started telling me, she wakes up
[Guest]: at 5am, there's water, you have to stand in line, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. It goes on. Then she
[Guest]: makes the lunch. Then she makes the dinner. I said, why can't you cook lunch and dinner at the
[Guest]: same time? Just cook it once a day. And she was insulted. She said, my husband's not going to eat
[Guest]: basi khana. My children are not going to eat basi khana. So she's cooking twice a day,
[Guest]: unquestioningly, you know, because the food must be made twice a day. So yeah, when the men work,
[Guest]: the unpaid work, what does your son do? I asked, does he help you? Yes, he helps me. What does he
[Guest]: do? If I need something, he runs to the market and gets it. So that's included in the care work.
[Guest]: So regardless of what they do, it is pretty steep. It's one of the worst in the world.
[Amit Varma]: And at some level, this kind of, like the man in this case, the husband who doesn't want basi
[Amit Varma]: food is perhaps completely oblivious to what he's putting his wife through by making her cook twice
[Guest]: a day. But it's a woman who doesn't want to give him basi food also. So this is the point that you
[Guest]: were making about men and women. I mean, women are a part of the patriarchy as well. And there
[Guest]: are feminist men. So when you talk about the fight, the gender fight, the fight for gender
[Guest]: equality, let's not forget, let's not forget Jyoti Singh Pandey's father, right? We're coming
[Guest]: back to Jyoti Singh Pandey. He sold his ancestral land in his village because he wanted to educate
[Guest]: his daughter. She wanted to be a physiotherapist and he had two sons, two younger sons after her.
[Guest]: He never once said, I need money for your dowry. He never once said, I need money for your brother's
[Guest]: education because they are going to rightfully look after me in my old age. She said, I want
[Guest]: to be a physiotherapist. He sold the land to finance her education. So our greatest allies
[Guest]: can also be men. So patriarchy is about gender, but it need not always be gendered. You have
[Amit Varma]: feminist men and you have patriarchal women. That's a great point. And another sort of
[Amit Varma]: point you made about why more women don't work is agency, where again, to quote from you,
[Amit Varma]: the 2011 Human Development Survey finds that a sizable number of women need to take permission
[Amit Varma]: from a family member to even go to the market or healthcare, said Rohini Pandey of Howard
[Amit Varma]: Kennedy School. And again, you quote her, in the end, it's pretty difficult to look for a job if
[Amit Varma]: you can't leave the house alone. Stop quote. Absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: And like you said, women are part of this. It's even, it's a girl's mother who will tell her that
[Guest]: no, you can't go alone. Or the mother-in-law. Yeah. Somebody needs to go with you. Sometimes,
[Guest]: in fact, in Bihar, I met women and sometimes they are accompanied to the market with some
[Guest]: small boy, a five-year-old boy, you know, they're holding that little boy, but that boy must go with
[Amit Varma]: them to the market because they cannot go alone. Wow. And another sort of thing that comes in the
[Amit Varma]: way of women working is the sort of disincentives for employers to employ women. Like again,
[Amit Varma]: a quote from one of your pieces, Medha Oniyal, Program Director of the Pratham Institute was
[Amit Varma]: more blunt. And here you quote the lady, when you have women on the payroll, you are legally
[Amit Varma]: required to provide facilities like a creche. So a lot of employers have a clear mandate of
[Amit Varma]: not hiring women. Stop quote. And these sort of disincentives even come through, say,
[Amit Varma]: well-intentioned policies like maternity leave, mandated maternity leave and all where sort of
[Amit Varma]: these disincentives as such exist. What's your feeling on that?
[Guest]: So let me tell you what my problem with maternity leave is. When the government,
[Guest]: the previous government increased maternity leave, of course, everybody cheered, listen, six months,
[Guest]: why not? You know, it's great. But when you mandate six months for women and nothing for men,
[Guest]: I mean, in the private sector, there are some enlightened, quote unquote,
[Guest]: enlightened companies that will give you 10 days off. What is your messaging?
[Guest]: Your messaging is that this is your job. A man's job is nothing. So who's again,
[Guest]: you're reinforcing the stereotype of what is women's work? See, what is my objection to unpaid
[Guest]: care work? My objection to unpaid care work is that when you're spending five hours a day
[Guest]: fetching water or fetching firewood, where is the time to go and do paid work?
[Guest]: So you are working, you're just not getting paid for it, right? When you bring in a mandate,
[Guest]: when you increase maternity leave by six months, what happens? Small and medium enterprises tell
[Guest]: themselves, there is a certain demographic that I will not hire. A young, about to be married,
[Guest]: marriageable age or recently married woman with no children, I can't afford to hire her because I
[Guest]: can't afford to give her six months leave. Right? You have to understand. So is the government
[Guest]: subsidizing a part of that leave? I'd like to know that. And my point is, why do we not? We have a
[Guest]: model in the Scandinavian countries where you have, it's called parental leave. So it's three
[Guest]: months for moms, three months for dads, and then the remaining three months, you choose which one.
[Guest]: And the three months for dads cannot be transferred to the moms. And I was shocked. I was on a TV
[Guest]: debate talking about this, my objection to maternity leave. And Naina Lal Kidwai was
[Guest]: on the panel with me and said, oh, you know, if you give men paternity leave, they will all go
[Guest]: off to play golf. And I found that patronizing to the extreme, because you're basically saying that
[Guest]: men are shits and they will do nothing. You don't give them a chance. And if you mandate it and say
[Guest]: this leave cannot be transferred to women, then maybe they won't. So what happens when women
[Guest]: get this? And let's remember, we're talking about the formal sector that only hires what,
[Guest]: 4% women? The informal sector, we're not even talking about where the vast majority of women
[Guest]: work. So in the formal sector as well, when a woman takes six months leave, let's say she's
[Guest]: in a big company like an IBM, right? And when she comes back, she suddenly finds that she's
[Guest]: redundant. She suddenly finds that, and I know this from personal experience, talking to young
[Guest]: women in the IT sector, they say, oh, you know, when we came back from work, from maternity leave,
[Guest]: six months, which is allowed to us. And we came back and we said, our bosses say, look, don't do
[Guest]: this. This assignment is really a tough assignment. So the women, so this is another interesting
[Guest]: statistic, right? NASSCOM did a survey. At entry level, women in tech are 51%.
[Guest]: But overall, it's only 36%. And at the senior leadership level, it dwindles to single
[Guest]: percentages. The same newsroom example I gave you about, women are there all across the newsroom,
[Guest]: but in the corner offices, they're only men. So what happens at middle management level
[Guest]: is that that is when your kids, you start having children, or the parents grow older,
[Guest]: or the in-laws, you know, there's an in-law who's suddenly incapacitated, has to be taken to the
[Guest]: hospital. That burden falls on women and not on men. So when a woman often comes back from maternity
[Guest]: leave, her boss will tell her, you're a very nice, lovely man, the supervisor, and he's saying, no,
[Guest]: don't do this assignment. It's a tough assignment, the long hours. So the women lose out on
[Guest]: opportunities. They lose out on the foreign assignments, on the challenging assignments,
[Guest]: because within the office, there is a culture that says, you can't do it, you're a mom.
[Amit Varma]: Right. And I should at this point say that, you know, two of the editors I work with as a columnist
[Amit Varma]: are both women. So there are some women in the corner office, but journalism is very much the
[Amit Varma]: exception in that, in that sense that I think the rate of women in journalism must be way higher.
[Guest]: Yes. Than other professions.
[Guest]: Like journalism, entertainment, you know, so you do have a higher proportion of women. And yes,
[Guest]: as the generations proceed, as we started talking about how every generation had its own battle. So
[Guest]: today's battle is going to shift to the corner rooms. The battle is not in some sectors and
[Guest]: amongst a certain demographic, the battle is retaining talent. So in 51% women are joining
[Guest]: tech. So they're coming into the workforce, but somewhere, somewhere they just fall off
[Guest]: because there is a glass ceiling that remains intact. And I've spoken to so many women as well
[Guest]: as men, more women than men, of course, when you look about workplace design, you have to ask
[Guest]: yourself who designed the workplace. It's not designed by women. It's designed by men. Men are
[Guest]: very happy. Men have only one job. They have to go to work and they have to be brilliant. That is it.
[Guest]: They don't have to worry about who's putting the kids to bed or who's taking mom to the hospital
[Guest]: for her checkup or any of that. They don't have to worry. They just get into work. Someone is
[Guest]: looking after them. And in fact, in Lean In, Sheryl Sandberg talks about the fact that every
[Guest]: successful CEO has a wife who's propping him up. Every successful woman CEO does not necessarily
[Guest]: have that husband who's doing the same job. I mean, how many husbands do we have who will say
[Guest]: they'll give up their careers and they'll tell their wives, go out and be brilliant. I'll take
[Guest]: care of the house, or I'll at least share an equal share of this burden. They're very few.
[Guest]: And when men do it, they're heroes. You say, wow, look at this guy. What a super dad. When a mom
[Guest]: quits her job, she's just another mom. It's no big deal. No. And in fact, you mentioned workplace
[Amit Varma]: design. I'd written an editorial at around the time Me Too happened. And it's interesting that
[Amit Varma]: if you consider the air conditioning in offices, air conditioning was essentially, it was
[Amit Varma]: regularized in offices in the 50s and 60s when offices were mostly full of men and the optimum
[Amit Varma]: temperature then was fixed at whatever it was. Now, since then, we've discovered that men tend
[Amit Varma]: to be comfortable at a particular temperature and women need a slightly higher temperature
[Amit Varma]: to be comfortable. So in the normal office designed for a man, if the man is comfortable,
[Amit Varma]: the woman will inevitably be cold. And this is something modern offices have simply not taken
[Guest]: into account. Well, I wish the problem was just air conditioning. But it's not. When I'm talking
[Guest]: about workplace design, I'm talking, look, women are capable of working very hard. On construction
[Guest]: sites, you'll see that women can carry headloads of up to 60 kilos. But women want to work very
[Guest]: differently from men. Women need breaks. A lot of women say, I need to be home at lunchtime because
[Guest]: I need to cook with an invalid parent or my children are coming home from school and I need
[Guest]: to get food on the table. I can come back. So that's why women, I mean, for me, freelancing was
[Guest]: liberating because I did not have to spend time commuting. I did not have to spend time in,
[Guest]: you know, frankly, pretty useless meetings. It freed me up and I was able to work. So I could
[Guest]: work early in the morning. I could work late at night when my kids are grown up now, but when
[Guest]: they were younger, you put the kids to bed, you work. So women can work very hard and are very
[Guest]: dedicated and have a certain discipline. And then, of course, you have workplaces designed by men
[Guest]: designing things like off-sites. My God, I mean, women, I can tell you, hate off-sites. They hate
[Guest]: off-sites because it takes them away. It means it's a logistics nightmare because you have to plan
[Guest]: food, you have to put food in the freezer, you have to make sure who's going to take the kids
[Guest]: to school, blah, blah, blah. Or let's take another example, networking after drinks. How many women
[Guest]: really have the freedom to do that? So it's very well for Sheryl Sandberg and others to say,
[Guest]: lean in. How much are you going to lean? And you can lean and lean and lean with all your might.
[Guest]: But ultimately, workplaces also need to recognize that if they are to retain female talent, then
[Guest]: they need to lean in too. They need to lean out. And in fact, the point you made about, you know,
[Amit Varma]: networking after work hours and all, and just thinking aloud, it strikes me as another reason
[Amit Varma]: of many, many reasons that women don't reach the corner office because rising in corporate life
[Amit Varma]: requires so much networking and schmoozing and all of that. And, you know, women spend less time
[Amit Varma]: networking perhaps and more focused on their jobs. And they will, of course, be very wary of schmoozing.
[Guest]: Yeah. So all of these become impediments. Yeah, I see myself, you're taking me back to the days
[Guest]: when I wanted to pick up my bag at five o'clock. I was willing to make the sacrifice. I was taking
[Guest]: the pain of earning half of what everybody else was earning, even though I was doing as much work.
[Guest]: And, but I need to be home. That was it. That was a non-negotiable for me. Now, if you tell me
[Guest]: that, well, you have to go out, you have to meet contacts, you have to meet sources, you have to
[Guest]: have drinks, you have to go for off sites, you have to do all these bonding exercises so that
[Amit Varma]: you can bond as a team. I mean, it is painful. We'll take a quick commercial break now. And
[Amit Varma]: after we return, we'll talk about your favorite state, Haryana.
[Unknown]: Hey, everybody, welcome to another great week on the IBM Podcast Network. You know,
[Unknown]: the greatest place on earth to work on. If you're interested in working with us,
[Unknown]: please do send us your resume at careersinthisbox.com. We're looking for people in business
[Unknown]: roles. We're looking for people in creative roles. We're looking for audio engineers,
[Unknown]: graphic designers, all kinds of things. So please do apply. Also wanted to ask everybody,
[Unknown]: please tell a friend about your favorite podcast on the IBM Network. We really do depend on your
[Unknown]: word of mouth. You are our biggest ambassadors, and we'd really, really appreciate all of your
[Unknown]: support. Also, if you are enjoying what you listen to, take a screenshot, tag us on social media,
[Unknown]: and we will repost that. This week on Cyrus Said, Cyrus is joined by Eva Budd. She's the head of
[Unknown]: Bollywood content at 9x Media. Eva recounts some of her favorite and not-so-favorite experiences
[Unknown]: interviewing Bollywood celebs, her new podcast, 9xm Soundcast, available on the IBM Podcast
[Unknown]: Network, and displays her singing talent. This week, we're launching a new podcast called
[Unknown]: Football Shootball. It's hosted by three diehard football fans, Gaurav Sapre,
[Unknown]: Sivram Parmeswaran, and Karthik Iyer. Tune in to get your weekly football fix that brings
[Unknown]: in-depth analysis along with unhinged banter. First episode releases on Wednesday, 7th of August.
[Unknown]: On the season finale of Not Just Dhansak, Bhabhi Bride Prasen Patel meets Chef Bawa Farhad Kulkarnia.
[Unknown]: Also, the co-hosts are keeping it queer. They talk about the varieties of Dhansaks and how
[Unknown]: there's no one way of cooking it. On Simplified, Chuck and Naren are joined by guest Tony Sebastian
[Unknown]: for part two of the history of the Cricket World Cup. On Mr. & Mrs. Binge Watch, Janice and Anirudh
[Unknown]: talk about the critically acclaimed Emmy-nominated show When They See Us. On The Origin of Things,
[Unknown]: Chuck narrates the story about the early internet, smut, and an unlikely investment.
[Unknown]: On What A Player, Mikhail Admeda is joined by comedian Joel D'Souza to discuss cricket,
[Unknown]: football, Formula 1, and of course, darts. On The Habit Coach Podcast, Ashton Docter talks
[Unknown]: about journaling and narrates examples of prominent people who maintain journals of
[Unknown]: their lives. He also explains how to keep a journal and learn more about your mind.
[Unknown]: On The Empowering Series, Zarina Poonawalla is joined by the Managing Director of Genetic
[Unknown]: CallNet Consultancy, Vishal Keswani. They talk about how you can discover a suitable
[Unknown]: career and how to deal with conflicts in any industry. And with that, let's get you on with
[Amit Varma]: your show. Welcome back to The Seen and The Unseen. I'm chatting with Namita Bhandare about
[Amit Varma]: women at work or in general, the state of women in India today. One of the things that fascinated
[Amit Varma]: me about your many pieces, both your series on India Spend and then you've written separate
[Amit Varma]: pieces in Hindu Sun Times about it over the years, is sort of looking at Haryana as a case study in
[Amit Varma]: particular. And again, I'll quote some figures from your pieces. You point out that Haryana has
[Amit Varma]: famously a very low sex ratio, 836 girls for every 1000 boys at birth among children born in the last
[Amit Varma]: five years. This was in a data in 2015-16. And the national average at this time was 919, which
[Amit Varma]: itself is abysmal. I mean, just as we talk about, say, an invisible country, you can also talk about
[Amit Varma]: a lost country of the missing women as the famous phrase goes. And to quote from one of your pieces,
[Amit Varma]: quote, in 2015, for instance, Haryana reported the country's largest number of gang rapes,
[Amit Varma]: 1.6 for every 1 lakh women, according to National Crime Records Bureau data. It had the second
[Amit Varma]: highest rate of dowry deaths at 1.9 per lakh population, and the third highest rate in
[Amit Varma]: stalking women at 2.7 cases per lakh population. And you've spent a lot of time in Haryana. Tell
[Amit Varma]: us about some of the sort of insights you've got about what's going on there.
[Guest]: You know, when you think about dystopian horror stories, it's almost like a black mirror
[Guest]: episode, right? What happens in villages that kill off its daughters? You have women being
[Guest]: trafficked from the Northeast and from other states, poorer states into Haryana. Haryana is
[Guest]: a rich state. So it does poorly on gender indices, but is otherwise a prosperous state with agriculture
[Guest]: and so on. And so they can afford to buy. So I have met women who are being imported in,
[Guest]: they're being trafficked really, you know, for marriage, sometimes being shared between two
[Guest]: brothers, really functioning as sex slaves in a state that has chosen to kill off its daughters.
[Guest]: And this is not something, I mean, you're seeing this horror spread. I mean,
[Guest]: Beti Bachao began in Haryana. It was launched, if you remember, by Narendra Modi from Haryana
[Guest]: for a reason. And that was to, you know, the acceptability of daughters. Recently,
[Guest]: you must have read in the news, Uttarakhand, 130 villages that have not seen the birth of a girl
[Guest]: for the last few months, right? You know, Amartya Sen wrote about the missing women, I mean,
[Guest]: missing girls. You're seeing this happen. This is not an academic or a theoretical discussion.
[Guest]: You are seeing it happen. What happens when a state does not value its girls?
[Guest]: So when a state does not value its girls, you will have a very high incidence of crime,
[Guest]: because who's going to speak up? Who is speaking up for the rights of these women?
[Guest]: I mean, you've killed off the women, right? So you have very high crime rate, you have otherwise
[Guest]: very poor gender indices. But it is like all of India, Haryana is also filled with contradictions.
[Guest]: So one of the things that you will find in Haryana, a lot of our sports women,
[Guest]: our athletes are coming from Haryana, from this state where ghoonghat is like an accepted norm.
[Guest]: And I remember there was a big furor because one of the state magazines issued by the state
[Guest]: government, I mean, the headline was ghoonghat ki something aan baan hamari desh ki shaan.
[Guest]: You know, ghoonghat was desh ki shaan. And I have been to panchayat elections where women
[Guest]: are campaigning in ghoonghat and you can't tell who's the candidate because they're all looking
[Guest]: the same. Because they've all covered their faces up to their knees, like ghoonghat is literally
[Guest]: down to their knees. And yet you have this, the Fogart sisters, I mean, rough contact sport like
[Guest]: wrestling, you know, and I think part of it comes from the fact that the desire for a government job.
[Guest]: So parents feel that this is their ticket. So you will allow your daughter to play this sport
[Guest]: in the hope that she'll get a sports quota and get a government job.
[Amit Varma]: And the government job, as you've pointed out, is considered more respectable for them.
[Guest]: Absolutely. Private sector jobs in Haryana are absolutely looked down upon. And the Jindals
[Guest]: have set up a steel factory. And I had gone and visited there. And there were a few women working
[Guest]: and right on the factory floor, you know, so this was very revolutionary for Haryana. Most of them
[Guest]: were actually unmarried. So they were in that little window that I mentioned between education
[Guest]: and marriage. And one or two were engaged to be married. And you know, they were very clear
[Guest]: that shadi ke baad, it depends on what our husband says. And we know what he will say.
[Guest]: I'm doing this for pocket money. You know, that was the excuse.
[Amit Varma]: I actually have another theory about how this whole thing of women in sport kicked off in
[Amit Varma]: Haryana. I done a feature story on Sakshi Malik a few years ago after the Olympics. And the trend
[Amit Varma]: of women entering wrestling really began in about 1997 when there was this legendary coach called
[Amit Varma]: Chandgi Ram. And Chandgi Ram was a famous wrestler himself. And he didn't have sons. And in 1997,
[Amit Varma]: the Olympic Committee announced that from 2004, there would be women's wrestling in the Olympics
[Amit Varma]: for the first time. And he saw that as an opportunity to get an Olympic medal for his
[Amit Varma]: family and therefore trained his daughter Sonika Kalikaraman, who became an accomplished wrestler
[Amit Varma]: herself and Mahavir Phogat from there, who was one of Chandgi Ram's assistants, if I remember,
[Amit Varma]: trained his daughters. So even the root of that, which seems like empowerment,
[Amit Varma]: so many women in sport, even the root of that is male ego.
[Guest]: Yeah. But if the result is that women are coming forward, I wouldn't quibble about that. I'm happy
[Guest]: with male ego. And thank God that there were no portable ultrasound machines as there are now
[Guest]: going literally into technology is being used. So, you know, maybe there would have been sons
[Guest]: if these ultrasound, portable ultrasound machines were going into every village
[Guest]: at the time. But because there were no sons, these girls were allowed to come up. Yes,
[Guest]: I get your point about it being a double-edged sword, but look at it from the other side,
[Amit Varma]: at least they came up. At least girls today have role models. I mean, another point you made in
[Amit Varma]: your series was about how when a woman works, it is not only that that one woman has a job and
[Amit Varma]: she's working, it has a huge number of knock-on effects around her. Tell me a bit about that.
[Guest]: Most of all, on her own standing, on her own self-esteem, on her own sense of who she is
[Guest]: within the family, she suddenly gets a certain enhanced status because she's bringing in money,
[Guest]: she's bringing in prestige, she definitely gets a say in household decisions. She's a person,
[Guest]: she's not just the roti provider or the child nurturer, you know, she is a person with a job
[Guest]: and an identity. So I think that is something that is very, very important when women work.
[Guest]: Let's forget about GDP and what it does to the economy. And of course, she becomes a role model
[Guest]: for her daughters. The daughters of an employed mom are more likely to be employed themselves,
[Guest]: you know, because they accept that as normal. The sons see their moms going out to work.
[Guest]: And so they say, well, you know, it's okay if our wives do the same. So it is a virtuous cycle. I
[Guest]: don't see a downside to it at all, except of course, a downside to the woman's own sense of
[Guest]: stress and managing the hundred things that she must multitask in order to get out of the house
[Amit Varma]: to work. And despite this virtuous cycle, you know, women's participation in the labor force
[Amit Varma]: is going down. And I meant to ask you a question earlier, well, we were talking about that,
[Amit Varma]: but I forgot. So I'll ask that and then we'll go back to Haryana, which is about, you know,
[Amit Varma]: Claudia Golden, you must be familiar with her work, wrote about this famous U-shaped curve,
[Amit Varma]: where, you know, as countries grow more advanced in the technology scale, less women work,
[Amit Varma]: but then that changes as again, more women work. Does that curve apply to us? Are we at the low
[Guest]: end of that curve or is something else happening entirely? So I don't have a crystal ball and I
[Guest]: don't think anybody does. So we were definitely at the downward trend of the U-curve and we're
[Guest]: going on sliding, you know, as you mentioned, demonetization, everybody made such a noise,
[Guest]: you know, the headlines in every paper about job loss. Nobody pointed out the fact that the job
[Guest]: loss was entirely amongst women. 0.9 men actually came into jobs after the first four months of
[Guest]: demonetization. It was the women who lost jobs. So somehow again, it's a silent crisis that we
[Guest]: don't see. And it is going on sliding, you know, down from 27 down to 25%. We don't know where the
[Guest]: slide will end and when we'll bounce back. There is no way of telling when that will happen. We do
[Guest]: have a jobs crisis. And I would like to just mention over here that it's almost as if jobs
[Guest]: have become the new banana. What do I mean by that? I mean that in the old days, you often heard
[Guest]: these stories about if a family is very poor and they had one banana, they would give it to the son,
[Guest]: right? Not to the daughters. So jobs are that new banana. So within families, and I will not
[Guest]: take the name of a minister from my favorite state of Haryana. It's not my favorite state.
[Amit Varma]: It's just a state I've traveled to a lot. It's totally your favorite state. We're on the record.
[Guest]: Oh, please come on. The gender record is awful. Appalling. Really appalling. And this minister
[Guest]: told me, he says, Why are you doing so much women's labor force participation? If women
[Guest]: get jobs, where will men go? So you must understand politically, why is it that political
[Guest]: parties, you know, they don't, when political parties talk about women's empowerment, what are
[Guest]: they talking about? CCTV footage? You know, crime rate? That's all they talk about. Nobody talks
[Guest]: about jobs for women. And the reason why they don't talk about it is because they realize that,
[Guest]: you know, when a man loses his job, he will come out on the street and agitate. 19.6, let's imagine
[Guest]: 19.6 million men lost jobs in just a decade. Would there be such silence in the media amongst
[Guest]: social groups, amongst feminist groups, amongst, I mean, in every sector, there is nothing,
[Guest]: there is silence. Because where are those 19 points? I'll tell you one of the most difficult
[Guest]: things that I faced while doing the series is finding women who had quit jobs. Because when
[Guest]: a woman quits her job, she just melts into her kitchen. You cannot find these 19.6 million women,
[Guest]: they're not in Jantar Mantar protesting, the men would have brought the governments down,
[Guest]: successive governments down of 19.6 million men, it would have been a massive crisis on the front
[Guest]: page of every newspaper and on the top of talk shows and on every TV channels.
[Amit Varma]: And that's a very evocative and moving phrase melts into her kitchen. You know, I remember
[Amit Varma]: this column last year by a columnist, I won't name her, but it kind of made me very angry,
[Amit Varma]: where the column basically made the argument that it's fine if women don't work and they do
[Amit Varma]: the unpaid work they do at home, because that is more optimal for society, which really pissed me
[Amit Varma]: off. And I was editing Pragati at that time, I got one of my colleagues Devika Khet to write a
[Amit Varma]: piece about that, because sort of rebutting that and that seems to me to be an analog of the kind
[Amit Varma]: of argument you once heard and still hear sometimes in the context of caste, where even Gandhi made
[Amit Varma]: the argument once that there is a purpose for the caste system and is good for society that
[Amit Varma]: it's like that and everyone has the roles that they must play. And how does one respond to
[Guest]: arguments like this? Oh, that is such bullshit. It really is. You know, this whole business of how,
[Guest]: when women actually you have men, male economists and economists, I mean, saying basically,
[Guest]: oh, women dropping out of the workforce is actually a good thing, because this means that
[Guest]: A, the economy is progressing. So the U-curve syndrome that you spoke about, and B, this is
[Guest]: pitched as a wonderful luxury for women. Why do you want to work? Why do you want to rush in the
[Guest]: metro for a job? You can sit at home, relax. And make food twice a day. Because your husband doesn't
[Guest]: want to eat basi khana. It is pitched as a luxury, as something that is aspirational,
[Guest]: and as a step forward for women. You know, motherhood is endowed with such a lot of
[Guest]: sublime and this, you know, everywhere in the popular culture, if you look at ads,
[Guest]: you work with an ad agency. For eight months, 25 years ago, don't hold it against me.
[Guest]: And you have these, you know, butterflies and mother's love and mother's care. And,
[Guest]: you know, it's like this noble, you know, my God, being a mother is the greatest thing any
[Guest]: woman can do. I mean, why is not fatherhood endowed with that same, some of that same nobility?
[Guest]: So a woman who says, well, I would rather have a career than sit at home and look after my children,
[Guest]: you know, is a very, very bad woman. She's the woman we fear the most.
[Guest]: We do not approve of that woman who says, I'd rather go to work than sit at home,
[Amit Varma]: looking after my babies. And something else I'd want to talk about is family values. So,
[Amit Varma]: you know, I was chatting today with a friend of mine. And he said that one of the great problems
[Amit Varma]: in America today, one of the great social problems is a breakdown of family values.
[Amit Varma]: And there's no phrase I hate more than that. I mean, I just thought that the very problem
[Guest]: with India is bloody family values. Do you agree? I do. I do agree. Unpopular as this may make
[Guest]: both of us. The family, look, families, as we said, there are families and families. Jyoti Singh
[Guest]: Pandey's father is my role model, you know, a man who can sell his, but how many fathers are there
[Guest]: like that? It is so, when we talk, when I say that, what is holding women back? Why are women
[Guest]: falling off the workforce? The good news, the good reason why some of them are falling off
[Guest]: the workforce is because they're in education rather than in employment. Fine. That's the
[Guest]: good news. But what is the other reason? And the main other reason, you know, when you say patriarchy,
[Guest]: patriarchy sounds like this wonderful, long word that masks a very ugly reality of Indian families,
[Guest]: because it is families that impose stereotypical roles, stereotyping on sons and daughters. This
[Guest]: is a girl's job. This is a boy's job. When a girl wants to go out to work, she must take the
[Guest]: permission of her father, her brother, her father-in-law, her husband, and sometimes even the
[Guest]: entire village panchayat. So I'll give you an example, the hospitality trade. There is a huge
[Guest]: demand for skilled women. But it is the family that says, but this is not good work for our
[Guest]: daughters. And I've spoken to fathers who have said, my daughter's not going to serve food to men
[Guest]: in a restaurant. You make her a captain. Now, how can she become a captain unless she's first
[Guest]: serving? So there is a demand. The jobs are there. But the families say this is not appropriate,
[Guest]: or the village will say this girl. So there's an institute that's training women for the
[Guest]: hospitality trade in Aurangabad. This is run by Pratham. And the women who enroll, who get in,
[Guest]: they actually get their fees subsidized to a very, very large degree compared to men.
[Guest]: Yet, despite the subsidy, only 30% of its intake is women. And of those 30%,
[Guest]: 50%, a large proportion who get job offers after they've complete, don't accept their
[Guest]: jobs because the girls are coming from tribal belts, from faraway villages. And the families,
[Guest]: first of all, don't want to send them even to train. And second of all, when they send them
[Guest]: to train, don't want them to live that far away. So they're allowed to come in batches. If they
[Guest]: come with three, four, five from the same village, they send them. But then three,
[Guest]: four, five cannot get a job in the same place. They have to be separated. And once girls are
[Guest]: separated, the parents don't want to send them off. And I'll never forget this one man I met.
[Guest]: He was so angry. He was a truck driver and his daughter had done the course and she had actually
[Guest]: joined it while he was off traveling somewhere, driving his truck. And when he came back,
[Guest]: he discovered that she had joined this hospitality course. And he was very angry because he had not
[Guest]: been consulted. And he just went on and I said, but what's wrong? Why? She had a job offer.
[Guest]: So he's, he's the one who told me, and she should not serve food. And he had all these objections.
[Guest]: And finally, in the end, he tells me, he says, I know what happens when girls get jobs. I said,
[Guest]: what? So he says, they do love marriages. You know, so the authority of the patriarch could
[Guest]: get eroded. And he gave me the example of his niece who had joined the police. And he says,
[Guest]: you know, she joined the police and then she did a court marriage. And now her father is so
[Guest]: embarrassed. He cannot show his face anywhere. So this is the mindset you are encountering in
[Guest]: larger and lesser degrees. And, and so that is why I say it's the families can be supportive.
[Guest]: I mean, if families choose, well, I'll give you an example. When we spoke about the motherhood
[Guest]: penalty, there is data that suggests that in families where there is a mother-in-law,
[Guest]: women are more likely to work because they will look after the children. They will take a lot of
[Guest]: the burden of the cooking and of a lot of the other work. So mother-in-laws can be extremely
[Guest]: supportive of women when they choose to be. This is the saas bahu serial no one has ever seen.
[Amit Varma]: Yes. And, and, and, you know, the, the interesting thing also is that even if jobs are available,
[Amit Varma]: even if women want to do them, even if their families just imagine are happy with them doing
[Amit Varma]: the jobs, sometimes they can't because of external circumstances. And coming back to Haryana,
[Amit Varma]: you've written a piece where the headline of the piece says it all, which is how rapes are
[Amit Varma]: impacting the mobility of women. And you point out in the piece that number one, sometimes a job
[Amit Varma]: involves even a little bit of travel. And, you know, that is dangerous to women because there
[Amit Varma]: is simply no rule of law anywhere in this country, let alone Haryana. And secondly, you quote the
[Amit Varma]: social worker called Kanta Singh, which is quote, when one girl is raped in a village, parents of
[Amit Varma]: the other girls will impose even more restrictions on their movement outside the house. Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And it's actually rational on the part of parents to impose those restrictions.
[Guest]: Absolutely. Kanta, of course, is a wonderful woman. She's with UNDP, very, she's from Haryana
[Guest]: and a sports woman, very passionate about bringing skilling to women in, in Haryana.
[Guest]: So let me give you an example. UNDP did a skilling program for the textile trade. And these,
[Guest]: I forget now how many women, 50 or 60 of them were trained and were placed in jobs and went off
[Guest]: to work. Within a month, there was only one woman left. Those 59 out of 60 had just dropped out
[Guest]: because it was too far, the bus was taking too long. And so I tracked down one of them,
[Guest]: you know, that was a job. I tracked down one of them and I sat down with her and she explained
[Guest]: to me, she said, when I did this skilling program, it was the summer. The days are long. Okay. And I
[Guest]: took this job and it was a one month skilling program and this job was great. It was dropping.
[Guest]: But she says in the winter, when the days became shorter, she says, my bus stop is one kilometer
[Guest]: from my village. I have to walk home in the dark. So forget Haryana, all over India, you know,
[Guest]: including in Delhi and Bombay, the big metros, the average, national average of women who use
[Guest]: public transport for work is what? Take a guess. I won't even take a guess. 22%. Only 22% women
[Guest]: women take public transport to work. There are many inhibiting factors. One is they don't want
[Guest]: to spend too much time, right? Because they have other things to do back at home. So if you go to
[Guest]: Bawana, which is on the outskirts of Delhi, women are bringing home job work from the nearby
[Guest]: factories, you know, for pathetic wages, you know, well below minimum standards, 100 rupees a day for
[Guest]: packing a garbatti, you know, which is back, you know, it's mind numbing work or bringing home
[Guest]: fan components, which then the whole family sits together, children, everybody sit together and
[Guest]: they help the mom out. She's getting 5,500 because she can't afford to go to work.
[Guest]: She cannot afford it either in terms of time or in terms of money. You know, a metro ticket is an
[Guest]: expensive thing for a woman. So she will get a much better paying job. So when a resettlement
[Guest]: colony like Bawana comes up, because the Supreme Court says polluting industries must be moved out
[Guest]: from, how does it impact the lives of women? This is how it impacts the lives of women,
[Guest]: that they can no longer, they have to give up jobs, which they might have had,
[Guest]: paying them better because they were in the heart of the city. They've now been thrown into some
[Guest]: wild wilderness where there is an extremely high crime rate. So there are mothers I spoke to who
[Guest]: said, I can't go to work for eight hours because when I come back, I don't know if my kid is going
[Guest]: to be here or not. My kid could be snatched. My daughter could be, you know, whatever, disappeared.
[Guest]: It happens. They have an enormously high crime rate. So crime does impact women's workforce
[Guest]: participation, both in terms of their own participation and in terms of the mothers,
[Guest]: because then the mothers are now doing chowkidari. So this one woman who does this agarbatti packing
[Guest]: business, she told me, she said, when my daughter gets married, I'll look for a full-time job.
[Guest]: But till she's married, I have to do her hifazat. This kind of brings me to a point I often make
[Amit Varma]: about the Indian state, that in my view, the Indian state should be a small but strong state,
[Amit Varma]: while right now it's broad and weak. Like there are a few things that the state should do,
[Amit Varma]: and it should focus on doing them well. And one of them is a rule of law. So, you know,
[Amit Varma]: there is all this conversation about, we should make this policy intervention or that policy
[Amit Varma]: intervention to help women out. But the basic fact is that if you just have the rule of law,
[Amit Varma]: if you just do that bit properly, so many of these problems can be, you know,
[Guest]: not solved, but so much better. Absolutely. There's no question. There's no question.
[Guest]: You know, recently, for instance, the UP government made an announcement saying that
[Guest]: they will provide free travel to women on the metros and on the buses. And of course, I mean,
[Guest]: I wrote a piece for Economic Times saying that it's a great move. But the caveat, which is,
[Guest]: you need to consider the costs. You need to, please don't do something that sounds populist.
[Guest]: You know, what is the nitty gritty? So, you bring in a policy intervention, but how are you going
[Guest]: to implement this policy? Have you done a cost analysis on increasing public transport vis-a-vis
[Guest]: the cost of subsidising those tickets? You could just put more buses on the road. Bawana, for
[Guest]: instance, does not even have public transport. So, how does it help that poor Agarbati Packer,
[Guest]: who is waiting for her daughter to get married so she can get back into the workforce? It doesn't
[Guest]: help her because there is no bus. There is no metro. She walks to work. Well, she actually
[Guest]: works from house, but her neighbours, for instance, those who do work, they either walk to work or
[Guest]: they take those shared auto rickshaws, which, you know, five rupees a head or something.
[Guest]: So, this subsidy is not going to help them. So, what is the implementation of the policy?
[Guest]: That is what worries me. You know, we kind of make these wonderful announcements and then we
[Amit Varma]: don't think about how we're going to follow through. Let's kind of move on now to an issue,
[Amit Varma]: which I guess doesn't impact most women in India, but does impact those of us in the elites,
[Amit Varma]: which is the whole Me Too movement. What was your sense of it? Well, it does impact most women
[Amit Varma]: in India. In the sense, it's an issue for most women, but most women in India probably are not
[Guest]: even aware that there was something like that. Well, most women in India, I would imagine,
[Guest]: at the workplace experience it in some form or the other. The 96% who are in the informal sector
[Guest]: do have a protection in law, which is in paper, because you're not going to, you know, speak up
[Guest]: and you don't, you have these two district committees in Delhi, all of Delhi. So, which
[Guest]: domestic worker is going to complain because, you know, her boss is watching porn in her presence
[Guest]: and this happens very often, I'm told, or he'll come out in his towel or maybe not even that.
[Guest]: I mean, that is sexual harassment. It fits the legal definition of workplace sexual harassment.
[Guest]: So, she's doing the pocha and the sahab is coming out naked from his shower. She'd just rather quit
[Guest]: her job and find something else. She's not going to go looking for where she can make this complaint
[Guest]: right on sexual harassment, which can't even be proved. There is no evidence. But the Me Too
[Guest]: movement, let us, okay, let's go back to the Me Too movement. I mean, just to clarify, I did not
[Amit Varma]: for a moment mean that women don't face harassment. It's absolutely ubiquitous. Yeah. But just in
[Amit Varma]: terms of, you know, what the Me Too movement kind of focused on, I mean, everyone coming out, I mean,
[Amit Varma]: it's all English speaking elites, unfortunately. It is. And again, back to the point that just
[Guest]: because you're elite does not mean you do not suffer. Exactly. Right. So, again, let's go back
[Guest]: to my point about the generational change. I did encounter a predatory boss very early in my career,
[Guest]: fortunately, and very quickly into my job. I mean, I had not even worked for one month
[Guest]: when this happened. The incident itself did not upset me. Honestly, it happened in a car. And
[Guest]: I mean, he was just ridiculous. I was able to push him off. It didn't bother me. I said,
[Guest]: okay, forget it. But a few days later, because I did tell a few friends about it,
[Guest]: and a few days later, he summoned me to his office, and I got the dressing down of my life.
[Guest]: He said, why are you talking about it? Because people will think you're showing off.
[Guest]: And really, for me, that was the intimidation, the malified, because he knew he had done something
[Guest]: wrong, right? And the attempt to silence me and throttle me, I said, I'm out of here, man. This
[Guest]: is just too much. So I served out my three-month notice, partly because it never occurred to me
[Guest]: that I could ask for a waiver. We started work at a time when there was no term called sexual
[Guest]: harassment. There was no law. There was no vishaka. There was none of that. So we have a
[Guest]: little sisterhood where we tell each other, he's a creep. Don't go to his office. He drinks at
[Guest]: night. Don't go into his cabin. So we looked out for each other, but it was a hazard of the
[Guest]: job that all of us encountered at some point or the other. I do not know a single woman,
[Guest]: and you're welcome to ask your female colleagues who have not experienced, at least of my
[Guest]: generation, who did not experience some form of absolutely blatant sexual harassment. I'm not
[Guest]: even talking about what the law supposedly protects you against, which includes sexist remarks,
[Guest]: making off-color jokes in the presence of... I'm not even... That was all the time. All the time.
[Guest]: You were in the conference room. Your boss would turn to you and say, would you order the coffee?
[Guest]: Why? Do I have some special coffee-making or coffee-ordering skills? Just because I'm...
[Guest]: Will you take the notes? Again, why? Because I'm the only woman who's sitting around the table.
[Guest]: So we forget in the Me Too, it is such a struggle for women to get a seat on the table.
[Guest]: And I'll tell you a story, Amit. And I read this in the Washington Post some years ago during the
[Guest]: Obama administration. And Obama was this great, empowered feminist. He was openly a feminist
[Guest]: leader and he hired a lot of women, but the women were still in a minority in the White House. And
[Guest]: so what would happen during meetings? And when I tell this story to women, they all understand.
[Guest]: Their eyes light up because they know exactly what I'm talking about. So you're sitting around
[Guest]: the conference table. You're maybe 10, 11 women and maybe 20 men. So you're kind of... You're
[Guest]: there, but you're not in equal numbers. The woman makes a point. The men will look into the air,
[Guest]: they'll drink their coffee, they'll stare at their phones or whatever. And some man will
[Guest]: then interrupt and take over. And then five minutes later, a man makes exactly the same point.
[Guest]: And everybody looks at him and they're clapping and they say, genius idea, man, genius.
[Guest]: So the women cottoned on to this and they decided that they were going to reinforce each other.
[Guest]: So if we were on the table and I was sitting with my friend and my friend, my female colleague,
[Guest]: made a point. And then she was, of course, overruled because men don't listen to women.
[Guest]: They don't know how to listen to women. I would say, no, let's go back to what
[Guest]: my friend was saying. And so the women decided consciously as a strategy to reinforce each other
[Guest]: around the conference table. This is the struggle I'm talking about, Amit, the struggle to get a
[Guest]: seat on the table. It is no man I know understands that fight. The fight, if you look at my story,
[Guest]: the fight to run away from an arranged marriage, from a claustrophobic arrangement that your
[Guest]: parents have planned for you, even though parents who love you, who dearly love you.
[Guest]: I can't say that my mother was a bad mother. She was a great mom and she was a very liberated mom
[Guest]: for her age and for her time. But her plan was that you will marry a nice man
[Guest]: and have children and wear nice, elegant saris and have tea parties and whatever.
[Guest]: And you can have a career, of course, but your family comes first. She was a lawyer
[Guest]: who quit her practice. She had a practice in Kanpur and she quit her practice even before
[Guest]: we were born. She got married and said, well, my children will need me someday.
[Guest]: So she gave it up in anticipation. And somewhere in her head, I think she resented it because she
[Guest]: said it very often. I had a great career. I had a great job. But yet as a mom,
[Guest]: she was not able to unlearn what she had learned, that repression where she had to give it up.
[Guest]: She resented giving it up, but she was not yet free enough to give us the freedom to say,
[Guest]: go and live your life. Doesn't matter if you're not married. Doesn't matter if you don't live at
[Guest]: home. Doesn't matter if you don't wear elegant saris and have nice teas. Go and have a job,
[Guest]: have a career, because if you were my son, I would expect the same from you.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the things that I sort of welcomed about the MeToo movement, and again, when I
[Amit Varma]: called it elite, I wasn't criticizing it. It was a lament that it should have been more widespread.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the things that I kind of welcomed about it was that a lot of these sexist attitudes,
[Amit Varma]: which were normalized, were suddenly being condemned very emphatically. For example,
[Amit Varma]: all of those little things like the off color joke, so you take the note, so you get the water
[Amit Varma]: and all of these attitudes were considered completely normal, you know, and a lot of women
[Amit Varma]: a lot of women in an earlier generation might have taken it for granted that there will be predators
[Amit Varma]: around, just avoid them and be careful. And that's all you need to do about it. And a lot of predators
[Amit Varma]: might also have taken for granted that no one's going to protest at what we do. And our success
[Amit Varma]: rate will be good enough to make it rational to continue predating, if I may use that verb.
[Amit Varma]: And I think to some extent, MeToo changed that understanding, at least in whatever circles it
[Amit Varma]: was widespread, and changed the incentives for men as well to behave because who knows who will
[Guest]: get called out next. Absolutely. Listen, in the early days of the, I'm talking about because,
[Guest]: you know, there are various MeToo movements, you know, are we talking about Bhavri Devi?
[Guest]: And what happened in Rajasthan? Or are we talking about Raya Sarkar's list,
[Guest]: which created a huge controversy, even amongst feminists and even amongst women,
[Guest]: tragically, where you had young feminists and old feminists getting into this needless scuffle,
[Guest]: because we dissipated our energy. Instead of understanding what is the enemy and who is the
[Guest]: enemy, we started fighting amongst each other, where the younger feminist said,
[Guest]: due process doesn't work. And the older feminist said, no, you have to believe in due process.
[Guest]: And so that debate kind of fizzled out. Then you come to October 2018, where you suddenly have
[Guest]: one woman, you know, starting with Tanushree Dutta's interview, then you have Bahima Kukreja.
[Guest]: And remember, these men who are being brought down were so-called woke feminist men,
[Guest]: who were working in comedy. And so, you know, Utsav Chakraborty set the cat amongst pigeons,
[Guest]: because he kind of condemned very bad behaviour by men, male employees of a pan masala company,
[Guest]: who were sent off on a cruise to Australia, behaved very badly as to be expected. And he said,
[Guest]: look at these men. And Mahima said, you're a hypocrite, because what have you been doing?
[Guest]: And then she, of course, exposed him. So there was evidence, there were screenshots,
[Guest]: and the men could not deny it. What was unprecedented was the fact that companies
[Guest]: took up and took note. You know, so there was a very big piya kulpa, where AIB, for instance,
[Guest]: just was disbanded. Phantom Films was disbanded. I know of media companies where they said,
[Guest]: even though the complainant had moved on to another job, they said, no, we'll hold an inquiry.
[Guest]: And then there were sensitization trainings. And I know at one of the sensitization trainings
[Guest]: that was conducted by my friend Paromita Vora of Agents of Ishq, where a woman put up her hand,
[Guest]: and she said, I want to say something. So she said, bolo. So she says, you know, when I'm making
[Guest]: the pages, my boss stands very close to me, and I don't like it. It's uncomfortable. And none of the
[Guest]: men had ever thought of that, because when you're making the pages, you will stand over someone's
[Guest]: shoulder. So she said, okay, let's do an exercise. What is a comfortable distance? And so they
[Guest]: actually did it. So this woman stood there and she said, well, I'm comfortable if you're standing
[Guest]: here. But if you come any closer, it really makes me very uncomfortable. So the men had not realized
[Guest]: this. They were not being creepy. They just hadn't realized. They hadn't understood that.
[Guest]: Of course, the first days were very exhilarating. You know, it was happening so fast. It was
[Guest]: organic. These were women coming forward. And you know, I mean, for women like me, my God,
[Guest]: I mean, this is a whole, it was a revelation that here you have this generation of strong,
[Guest]: and again, we're talking about a very small minority. We're not, we don't have to add that
[Guest]: caveat every time we're talking about the Me Too movement. But these were like strong, assertive
[Guest]: women who said, I'm not going to be silent. You know, I'm not going to make the compromises you
[Guest]: guys made. You know, you guys may have been brought up to say, well, compromise, learn the
[Guest]: tricks of the trade. How do you get along? Predator boss, avoid him, blah, blah, blah. We're not going
[Guest]: to do that because we have rights at work and we will voice those rights. And they had evidence in
[Guest]: terms of screenshots. They had initially at least the support of companies. But a year later,
[Guest]: what happened? You know, it's a sad story. If you look at so many of the early cases,
[Guest]: whether it is R. K. Pachori at Terry, six years after this woman spoke up and made a complaint,
[Guest]: both to her ICC, as well as to the police station, the trial is limping along.
[Guest]: Tarun Tejpal, Tehelka, what happened? Trial is limping along. You know, so
[Guest]: these are, of course, the older cases, but coming even to the Me Too cases,
[Guest]: very quickly, there was a fight back. There's always a pushback, right, for men.
[Guest]: So the criminal defamation, that's why the M. G. Akbar case is so interesting. It is not M. G.
[Guest]: Akbar who's on trial. Please remember, M. G. Akbar has been accused by 20 women,
[Guest]: including by one woman of rape. Okay, what she has said is that it was rape.
[Guest]: He is not under trial. He has filed a criminal defamation against one of his early tweeters,
[Guest]: Priya Ramani, who actually says he didn't do anything. And this trial is still going on
[Guest]: in court and I'm watching which way it will go. Not just because Priya Ramani is my friend,
[Guest]: but also because I really believe in this. I really believe, I want us as a society to ask,
[Guest]: to look into our own hearts and say, what will it take for women to speak up against injustice?
[Amit Varma]: And that was kind of one of the, like, again, when Me Too happened last year,
[Amit Varma]: more so than Me Too and Raya Sarkar's list, but when it happened last year,
[Amit Varma]: that was one of the things that gave me hope that number one, so many women are speaking out.
[Amit Varma]: And number two, this now changes the incentives for both men and women. Women are more likely to
[Amit Varma]: speak out and articulate their grievances. And men are more likely to be careful of their behavior,
[Amit Varma]: even if that is a wrong reason to behave well, it is at least a start. And I'm not so sure now,
[Amit Varma]: a few months on whether my optimism was misplaced or justified.
[Guest]: Yeah, well, I was also optimistic. I was like, wow, new deal for women. And one year later,
[Guest]: where are we? You know, Alok Nath, a case against him has been dismissed. Ajay Devgn says,
[Guest]: somebody who was accused of sexual harassment, he said, I believe in the Me Too movement.
[Guest]: You know, I really believe in this movement, but however, I can't reshoot portions of it,
[Guest]: because there'll be a very big cost involved. Writers who have been named, have publishing
[Guest]: books with publishers. M.J. Akbar is writing columns, for God's sake. M.J. Akbar has a cover
[Guest]: story coming out in Open Magazine. Now, I'm not saying that these guys should be, you know,
[Guest]: sent into Kalapani, but at least while the case is on, let us hear and what are we as a society.
[Guest]: So this is the same story, Amit, whether it is sexual harassment at the workplace or domestic
[Guest]: violence. I'm coming back to that figure of one in three women. One in three women have been beaten.
[Guest]: We know who these women are. They are our neighbors. We hear the screams at night. They
[Guest]: come to us in the morning with bruises and bandages. We give them a cup of tea, we hug
[Guest]: them and we send them right back. So what is happening is the same story. The cost of speaking
[Guest]: up is just too high for any kind of violence, whether it is domestic violence, sexual harassment,
[Guest]: rape. The spotlight is on the women. Who's on trial? M.J. Akbar is not on trial. Priya Ramani
[Guest]: is on trial. If convicted, she will go to jail for two years. So hand on heart, you know,
[Amit Varma]: what are we talking about? Yeah. And she's an absolute hero. I'll ask you a bunch of general
[Amit Varma]: questions that I had kind of saved for the end because I've taken up a lot of your time and this
[Amit Varma]: is not at all. It's been a pleasure. This is unpaid work for you. But good unpaid work. Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Okay. So question number one. And this is something that always kind of strikes me is that
[Amit Varma]: at the end of the day, women are almost 50 percent of the vote bank, slightly less than 50 percent
[Amit Varma]: because 919 women for every thousand men. But they're almost 50 percent of the vote bank. And
[Amit Varma]: you'd imagine that any political party, which positions itself as woman friendly in a genuine
[Amit Varma]: way beyond mere posturing, can actually get a significant vote bank on a side. And yet this
[Amit Varma]: does not happen. Women tend to follow the same kind of positions as the men in their families
[Guest]: do. Why is this? Yes and no. I don't think women often follow the same position as their husbands,
[Guest]: though husbands may like to believe that. And women are smart. Women are not stupid. So I'm
[Guest]: not sure that they always follow the family dictate. But women also remember one thing. We
[Guest]: don't vote as a vote bank. We don't vote as a bloc. You know, I mean, there is some evidence
[Guest]: that in the last and I think that evidence is still being passed. So I don't want to comment
[Guest]: too much on it. That women tend to go more with the Congress than with the BJP. But let's look
[Guest]: at evidence. Let's wait for the evidence. How many Muslim women, for instance, did any Muslim women
[Guest]: vote for the BJP because of triple talaq? We don't know. What was the impact of the Give Up Your
[Guest]: Subsidy or of Swachh Bharat on the women vote? You know, these are interesting questions. But
[Guest]: very interestingly, I'll tell you, states that do very well on gender indices, you think of Kerala,
[Guest]: you think of the Northeast, which otherwise, you know, Meghalaya, for instance, has a workforce
[Guest]: participation of almost 36%. But they have never elected, you know, a lot of the Northeast states
[Guest]: have never seen a woman contestant, let alone a woman MP. Manipur is one of them. And so while
[Guest]: at Kerala, very few women go into parliament or to the assemblies, whereas states like Haryana,
[Guest]: Punjab and Shamika Ravi of Brookings has studied that at great length, saying that women don't
[Guest]: necessarily want to vote for women. You know, they want to vote for someone who they feel will
[Guest]: be on their side. Naveen Patnaik, I mean, when history is written, I think there's this very
[Guest]: special thank you note due to him for taking the risk in actually saying that 33% seats in
[Guest]: parliament, not in the assemblies yet, will be reserved for women. And so who do you have? Yes,
[Guest]: you have the Bahubeti category. And I'm actually genuinely amused when people say, oh, if you have
[Guest]: reservation for women, they will all come in the Bahubeti category, because of course, the beta,
[Guest]: bhatija category doesn't upset anyone. You understand? So men who are coming, the young
[Guest]: MPs who are coming in, yeah, that doesn't upset anyone. But when a woman, my God, then you suddenly
[Guest]: say, oh, but she's the daughter, she's the daughter-in-law. And I'm sorry, I've just lost
[Amit Varma]: my train of thought. No, no, this was pretty much what I was asking that. I mean, I know women don't
[Amit Varma]: vote as a bloc and no one should vote as a bloc. You should make your individual judgments. But at
[Amit Varma]: the same time, you would imagine that women can actually form a very large interest group when
[Amit Varma]: it comes to their interests, and yet they do not do so. And perhaps that's because of the ingrained
[Guest]: patriarchy, which many women also represent, I guess. Yeah, and I think also in a lot of elections,
[Guest]: sometimes you just want to vote. So when a party is headed by a woman, for instance, Mamata,
[Guest]: who actually brought in even more women than Naveen Patnaik, many of whom are making headlines
[Guest]: like Mahua Moitra. They're just coming in, they're assertive. There's a new kind of woman.
[Guest]: So it is changing, but it's not changing fast enough. So we are congratulating ourselves
[Guest]: because we're now no longer 12.6% representation in parliament. We're wow, we're 14%. So there is
[Guest]: one school of thought that says, let's forget about hammering on and on about 33% reservation.
[Guest]: It's not happened in 25 years. It's not going to happen. Why don't we look at increasing the
[Guest]: number of parliamentary seats? Our population is now 1.3 billion. So there has to be, let's do a
[Guest]: study and find out that, I mean, how many people is an MP supposed to represent? The IITs did it.
[Guest]: You remember the IIT said, then we're not going to have reservation in the existing seats for women,
[Guest]: but because we want more women to come into the IITs, we'll increase the number of seats. So
[Guest]: increase the number of seats in parliament and give it for women. So you're not taking away
[Guest]: what is perceived to be a man's seat. It's a political hot potato though,
[Amit Varma]: because if you look at MP per number of constituents, what's happened over the
[Amit Varma]: last few decades is that the number of constituents per MP has gone up massively
[Amit Varma]: in the North and not so much in the South. So if you were to normalize that, you would suddenly have
[Amit Varma]: many more MPs from the cow belt, so to say, which is far more mythogenistic anywhere.
[Amit Varma]: They're thereby punishing the South for no fault of their own.
[Guest]: There are no easy solutions or answers. You're right Amit, I mean, there is no easy solution.
[Amit Varma]: Another question, which is that over the 30 years that you've been in journalism, and I did an
[Amit Varma]: episode on the metrics for women's empowerment, which was a fun episode with three ladies,
[Amit Varma]: Devika Kher, Nidhi Gupta and Hamsini Hariharan, which was about what kind of interesting metrics
[Amit Varma]: can we use to see whether women are getting empowered or not. And some were conventional,
[Amit Varma]: some were unconventional. But over the 30 years that you've sort of been a journalist and tracking
[Amit Varma]: these issues and so on, what are the kind of metrics you can offhand think of, which immediately
[Amit Varma]: make you think that, okay, this indicates that women are doing better?
[Guest]: So I'll point you to a study done recently by Nandi Foundation called Teenage Aspirations of
[Guest]: Girls, TAG, they've called it TAG. And it's a survey of, I believe, 70,000 girls, teenage girls
[Guest]: across India, rural, urban, small town, big town, etc, etc. And some of the metrics they've used,
[Guest]: because this is an aspirational survey, and the metrics that they've used is dreaming. How do you
[Guest]: dream? What do you want, desire? And 70% of these young teenage girls said they want careers before
[Guest]: marriage. That is heartening. Whether it actually happens in their life or not, I don't know, but
[Guest]: it is heartening that these girls, so that is an unusual metric to take. We're done with the
[Guest]: literacy, maternal mortality, infant mortality, blah, blah. The conventional metrics must remain.
[Guest]: But equally, I would like to say that I am worried that some of the conventional data is no longer
[Guest]: available to us. And it's not just jobs. For instance, National Crime Records Bureau has not
[Guest]: been updated for the last two years. That is worrying. So how are we tracking crimes against
[Guest]: women? Also, when you look at some crimes against women, for example, rape, let's take one example
[Guest]: of rape. I don't know the answer to the question of whether the actual number of rape cases are
[Guest]: going up or whether reporting has increased. If it is reporting that has increased, it's a good
[Guest]: thing. That means women are confident of a system, they're more assertive, they believe they will get
[Guest]: justice. This is a generation of women who will not be silenced. If it's the number of cases that
[Guest]: are going up, then that is more worrying. The NCRB, of course, does not distinguish and does not give
[Guest]: us the answer to that question. And in fact, does not answer the question at all, because we haven't
[Amit Varma]: had the data updated for two years. In fact, you know, going back to the earlier discussion
[Amit Varma]: we were having on family values, I once wrote a column for which I got roundly trolled, which
[Amit Varma]: essentially argued that one of the best metrics for women's empowerment is the rising divorce
[Guest]: rates. And that is a damn good thing, because it means more women are being able to leave bad
[Guest]: marriages. Yes, absolutely. I would agree. I'm not a great fan of family as it exists. I see how it
[Guest]: can be wonderful. And I remember I was at a dinner where this man, who's a very good friend of mine,
[Guest]: actually, was talking about the great glories of the joint family. And I asked him, I said,
[Guest]: why don't you ask your wife what she thinks? Because this joint family is sold. And what
[Guest]: about women and their freedom, their assertion, their desire? Because a joint family will cater
[Guest]: to the lowest common denominator. The great thing about a joint family is that it takes care of
[Guest]: everybody. Nobody is left out of the net. But the not so great thing is that it enforces a certain
[Guest]: rule, a family rule that then becomes invalid. So women chafe at it.
[Amit Varma]: Right. In terms of public policy, and I'll kind of elaborate on what I mean by this question.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, the basic question is in terms of public policy, what can be done to empower women?
[Amit Varma]: But my context for the question is that I often think that there are issues which are social
[Amit Varma]: problems. And the solutions to them must be social solutions that come from the culture itself.
[Amit Varma]: And finding either a political solution or a state led solution, or any of those things,
[Amit Varma]: have their limitations. Is that something you agree with? And in terms of public policy,
[Amit Varma]: what are the kind of policies you think would help women? And what are the kind of limits you
[Guest]: think there are to what a government can do? Okay, that's a pretty long question. So let
[Guest]: me try and remember to answer all aspects of it. You know, this business of mindset change
[Guest]: is something I've been hearing since December 2012. Back then, the Varma Commission sat down,
[Guest]: produced a fantastic report. I actually believe in terms of policy, we should just pull out the
[Guest]: Varma Commission report from whichever dusty shelf it is languishing in. It was really,
[Guest]: if you remember, it was a manifesto for modern Indian women. Unfortunately, when governments
[Guest]: rush in to make legislation to appease angry citizens, they brought in features that were
[Guest]: never recommended. Marital rape was recommended, was ignored, because that will break the structure
[Guest]: of the Indian family. And as far as I'm concerned, let it break, you know, frankly, because there is
[Guest]: something broken, there is something fundamentally wrong. We need a new design. So I would say,
[Guest]: bring back, take a look, somebody needs to take a look at the Varma Commission report once again,
[Guest]: and say, what did we miss? Because what has happened is that we've lurched from crisis to
[Guest]: crisis every time responding with a knee-jerk reaction. So when it turns out that one of the
[Guest]: six men who raped Jyoti Singh Pandey was a minor, we said, okay, we'll solve this problem. Let us
[Guest]: reduce the age of delinquency from 18 to 16. Now you're having reports of 15-year-old boys,
[Guest]: 14-year-old boys committing gang rape. What are you going to do? So that's not a solution,
[Guest]: reducing. Then what did you do? You said, oh, let's raise the age of consent for girls.
[Guest]: So the age of consent for girls went up from 16 to 18. Now Rukmini Srinivasan of the Hindu,
[Guest]: at that time she was with the Hindu, did this fascinating study looking at rape trials in
[Guest]: both Delhi and Bombay. And she found that over 50% of the rape cases that were under trial
[Guest]: in the various courts in both cities were actually filed by parents because the daughter was, let's
[Guest]: say, 17 years and nine months. So technically she's a minor. They do not approve of the boyfriend
[Guest]: because he's from a different caste, he's a different religion, or just because they have
[Guest]: not selected him. She is in a consensual relationship with him, but he is facing
[Guest]: rape cases and a rape charge, which will send him to jail for seven years, a minimum of seven years.
[Guest]: So there is something very broken. Our policies need a relook. And we have a prime minister who
[Guest]: says he's going to be this revolutionary. We need to go back to the drawing board,
[Guest]: whether it is talking about family, whether it is talking about workplace design, or whether
[Guest]: it's just talking about policies and laws on the ground. We need to stop this knee jerk reaction
[Guest]: and we need to look at it. Actually, I'm very happy that POXO is now looking, I think POXO has
[Guest]: always been gender blind. We need to make rape gender blind. Why not? Men get raped. You know,
[Guest]: Derrick O'Brien opened up very recently in parliament and hats off to him for his courage
[Guest]: in talking about how, but even adult men get raped. Men are raped in prisons.
[Guest]: We don't want to look at that. So we need really to relook the whole thing. If it means setting up,
[Guest]: we have the Burma commission, you don't want to look at the Burma commission, set up a new
[Guest]: commission. You know, the sexual harassment committee was disbanded as it transpires and
[Guest]: has now been reconstituted with Amit Shah at the head as the home minister.
[Guest]: I would say he should really constitute a working committee. You have lawyers,
[Guest]: we have the best legal minds and policy minds in the world. Put them together,
[Guest]: make them roll up their sleeves and we need a manifesto. We need a new manifesto for women.
[Guest]: Otherwise, we're going to go on and on and on like a stuck record, moving in circles, moving
[Guest]: one step forward, two steps backward, two steps forward, one step backward. I mean,
[Amit Varma]: something's got to give. I mean, what you just said really resonates
[Amit Varma]: because I think a lot of public policy in India tends to be almost like Jugaar and it's reactive
[Amit Varma]: and, you know, okay, juvenile has raped. What do we do? Let's bring down the age and
[Amit Varma]: so on. And you just keep reacting. And a lot of it is also optics. It's for posturing. I mean,
[Amit Varma]: this whole beti bachao, beti padao, where is it on the ground? Where is the rule of law for women?
[Guest]: I mean, it's all just talk. Absolutely. In fact, what is worrying is
[Guest]: Nirmala Sitharaman, the finance minister's statement in the economic survey saying that
[Guest]: we are now going to expand beti bachao, beti padao, and we're going to call it badlav,
[Guest]: which stands for beti aapki dhan lakshmi aur rajya lakshmi.
[Amit Varma]: They're like acronyms. I mean, really? Really?
[Guest]: Where are we going? You know, we are still a secular country as per our constitution.
[Guest]: And moreover, besides the nomenclature about dhan lakshmi and rajya lakshmi,
[Guest]: no, we have a constitution of India. Please hold that up. That is your only holy book.
[Guest]: You are guaranteeing to women equal status. I don't want my daughter to be dhan lakshmi
[Guest]: and rajya lakshmi. I want her to be an equal citizen who will be regarded with respect,
[Amit Varma]: with dignity as any other citizen. I mean, I would argue even with the
[Amit Varma]: constitution, it doesn't really do enough to protect individual rights. And even a woman,
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I had an episode a while back on this with a couple of lawyers where we spoke about
[Amit Varma]: how so many of the laws in India, like the adultery law, regard women as basically the
[Amit Varma]: property of men in the way that they are worded. So I think the change that we need is not harkening
[Amit Varma]: back to this constitution, which especially in recent years has been held up as this mythical
[Amit Varma]: perfect document, which is not. It's very imperfect and perhaps shall people will make it more
[Amit Varma]: imperfect, who knows. But to go back to one of those questions in that multi-question series
[Amit Varma]: that I unfairly thrust at you, to a certain extent, the key here is, you know, the state is always
[Amit Varma]: going to be reactive and is going to do jogar. To a certain extent, the real change has to kind
[Amit Varma]: of come from within society and change in our attitudes and whatever, and to some very small
[Amit Varma]: extent, but important extent, me too, was a part of that, for example, by me just raising awareness
[Amit Varma]: of these things that we tended to normalize. Through all these years, have you kind of seen
[Guest]: such change happening? Is there potential? Enormous. Enormous. I see it in my life,
[Guest]: in the 30 years that I've been working, when I started to now, you know, as I said, sexual
[Guest]: harassment was not even part of our language. We'd have to use words like he's a creep or he's a
[Guest]: lech. You know, the word did not exist. The term did not exist. Today, it gives us certain legal
[Guest]: rights, whether it actually works on the ground or not is another issue, but we have that in law.
[Guest]: So there's been a sea change. There's been a sea change in attitude in these young girls,
[Guest]: these 70% teenage girls who are dreaming of careers before marriage. I mean,
[Guest]: the girls, you're seeing them in sport. In Jharkhand, I just wrote about this football club,
[Guest]: which is tribal girls, very poor. In fact, Mohs Hima Das, what is, you know, look at her background.
[Guest]: This is the daughter of a farmer, you know, and you have these great stories coming out of India,
[Guest]: these few girls and each one of them, each one of them, not just improving her own life,
[Guest]: but acting as a beacon to hundreds, thousands, countless of women who see them. I mean,
[Guest]: when a young girl sees a Mary Kom, even if it's being played by a Priyanka Chopra,
[Guest]: she sees her up on the screen. I mean, you know, these are girls who dare to dream.
[Guest]: I think that is both heartbreaking and also heartening.
[Amit Varma]: No, and also, you know, like you correctly said, it's not just that Hima Das is a farmer's daughter
[Amit Varma]: come good, and that's a great story in itself. But you think of the million farmer's daughters
[Amit Varma]: who watch her and who say that I don't just have to be a farmer's daughter or a farmer's wife.
[Amit Varma]: This is probably something else. So I'll kind of end on a question about,
[Amit Varma]: you know, having sort of followed women in India, what's been happening socially and
[Amit Varma]: politically and culturally over the last 30 years, looking into the future, let's just say looking
[Amit Varma]: into the next 10 years and not going beyond that, what gives you hope and what gives you despair
[Guest]: about the state of women in India? Well, the statistics are grim. So really, that is
[Guest]: cause for despair and worry. Because whichever even there is evidence that the Beti Bachao has
[Guest]: not worked uniformly, sex ratio is going on declining. And the fact that there is no one
[Guest]: who really is talking about it, the silent war against half your country's population,
[Guest]: or less than half, because we've killed off so many, is cause for despair, concern, worry.
[Guest]: You know, as a citizen, as a woman, as a mother of daughters, I worry about what will happen,
[Guest]: you know, down the road, what is going to happen tomorrow, forget about 10 years.
[Guest]: The data is very, very grim. And I feel that we as a society, we're not thinking about this.
[Guest]: You know, when you talk of mindset change, mindset change is not something so difficult.
[Guest]: You're talking about a new education policy, for instance, am I seeing anything on mindset
[Guest]: change over there? I mean, are we just going to tinker with history books and change names from
[Guest]: Delhi to Delhi and say Mughals were very bad people? And, you know, Akbar was a villain,
[Guest]: but Rana Pratap, you know, let's get out of these debates. What is sex education? You know,
[Guest]: it's such a red letter, by God, no, no, no, as a society, what is sex education? It's teaching
[Guest]: boys and girls to respect each other. Instead, you have textbooks, ma gol gol roti banati hai.
[Guest]: So how does mindset change happen? But all you have to do is tell boys, you know, ask.
[Guest]: We're not saying that don't have sex, we're saying just ask. You know, it's not such a
[Guest]: revolutionary concept. Understand, empathize. That's missing in our, why are we not talking
[Guest]: about it in this new education curriculum? Why is it not anybody's problem? We are
[Guest]: half this nation's population. Why is it not anyone's problem? Not policymakers,
[Guest]: not governments, even the judiciary. Even though I say that often the judiciary is the last hope
[Guest]: for women and there's certainly, you know, adultery that you talked about is gone. 377 is gone.
[Guest]: Triple talaq was, let's not forget, it was banned by the Supreme Court, not by the government. So
[Guest]: the Supreme Court in many ways is progressive. And then you will have some ridiculous judgment
[Guest]: coming where court is referring to a live-in partner as a keep. What the hell is a keep,
[Guest]: yeah? Who uses these words? You know, so it's like, you just need something radical. And if
[Guest]: you don't do it, and this is what gives me hope, I think you have a generation of girls who will
[Guest]: take it. It doesn't matter if you don't give it to us, we will take it. On that emphatic hopeful
[Amit Varma]: note, thank you so much for coming on the show, Namita. I learned a lot, not just reading all
[Guest]: your pieces over the years, but talking to you today. Thank you, Amit. I learned a lot
[Amit Varma]: talking to you as well. And thank you so much for calling me.
[Amit Varma]: Transcribed by https://otter.ai
[Unknown]: Awesome. Once Chuck decided to start a podcast. And so he did. The end. Okay, that was a crappy
[Unknown]: story. But I've got some really cool stories over at my new show, the origin of things. On this
[Unknown]: podcast, I look at the stories of how brands came into being, and sometimes evolved out of quite
[Unknown]: unexpected circumstances. And to make it really fun, I revealed the name of the brand and sometimes
[Unknown]: a category only at the very end. The show is five to seven minutes per episode and perfect for
[Unknown]: trivia junkies and brand nerds, especially those with short attention spans. New episodes out every
[Unknown]: Wednesday on IBM podcast app or website, or any podcast app or site that you happen to prefer.
[Unknown]: End of story they lived happily ever after.
[Unknown]: How aware do you think you are of your laws and rights? Do you look up to laws when you're caught
[Unknown]: up in situations? Do you know what your rights are when you're stuck somewhere bad? Well, here's a
[Unknown]: show that can help you move an inch closer to being aware of what your rights are. Tune into
[Unknown]: Know Your Kanoon with me Amar Rana. This is a podcast meant to answer all your law related
[Unknown]: queries. Catch Know Your Kanoon every week on the IBM website, or the app or anywhere you get your
[Unknown]: podcasts from. Transcribed by https://otter.ai